   #[1]alternate

   [2]Skip to main content

   IFRAME: [3]https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-TLKXSWT

Help

     * [4]Help

User account menu

     * [5]Log in

   [6]ReliefWeb

Content Search

   What are you looking for? ______________________________
   (search) Search|t

Main navigation

     * [7]Updates
     * [8]Countries
     * [9]Disasters
     * [10]Organizations
     * [11]Topics
     * [12]Jobs
     * [13]Training

   Informing humanitarians worldwide 24/7 -- a service provided by UN OCHA

   [14]World + 2 more

General Assembly Adopts 51 Third Committee Drafts on Combating Glorification
of Nazism, Refugees, Displaced Persons, Protecting Children from Sexual
Exploitation

   Format
          News and Press Release

   Source

          + [15]UN GA

   Posted
          16 Dec 2022

   Originally published
          15 Dec 2022

   Origin
          [16]View original

   SEVENTY-SEVENTH SESSION, 54TH MEETING (PM)

   GA/12483

   Delegates Reject Country-Specific Texts as Political Tools to Interfere
   in Nations' Internal Affairs

   The General Assembly adopted 51 resolutions and 1 decision recommended
   by its Third Committee (Social, Humanitarian and Cultural) today,
   covering a range of issues, from the rights children, women, refugees
   and others forced to flee their homes, to combating the glorification
   of Nazism.

   Amid spirited debate, the Assembly adopted a draft on combating the
   glorification of Nazism by a recorded vote of 120 in favour to 50
   against, with 10 abstentions (Afghanistan, Ecuador, Myanmar, Palau,
   Panama, Papau New Guinea, Samoa, Switzerland, Republic of Korea and
   Türkiye).

   The representative of the Russian Federation, describing the vote as
   shocking, said that, for the first time in the history of the United
   Nations, former Axis Powers voted against a text condemning Nazism.
   Criticizing a country-specific approach to a thematic resolution, he
   rejected amended operative paragraph 4, which condemns Moscow's
   military operation in Ukraine.

   Echoing his stance, China's delegate opposed attempts to distort the
   history of the Second World War. The practice of adding
   country-specific content to thematic resolutions by means of amendments
   is inconsistent with the established practice of the Third Committee,
   she noted. In the same vein, Sri Lanka's delegate criticized amended
   contents for politicizing the issue of combating racism and neo-Nazism
   through a country-specific approach.

   Meanwhile, Ukraine's delegate stressed that operative paragraph 4
   speaks about Moscow's endeavours to justify its military invasion and
   territorial aggression on the purported basis of eliminating
   neo-Nazism. "That is why we do not allow rapists to lecture us about
   how to fight rape," he emphasized, adding that the summary executions
   of civilians by the Russians in Ukraine -- documented in the report of
   the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights -- may constitute
   the war crime of wilful killing. This is the fascism of today -- the
   glorification of Nazism being executed by the Russian Federation -- he
   asserted.

   Along similar lines, the representative of the United States stressed
   that Moscow's resolution is not a serious effort to combat Nazism and
   antisemitism; instead, it is a shameful ploy to justify its war of
   aggression in Ukraine. In full support of the amendment that became a
   part of the resolution, she categorically rejected that the draft has
   turned into a country-specific resolution. The representative of the
   Czech Republic, speaking on behalf of the European Union, rejected the
   term denazification, used by the Russian Federation to justify its
   illegal invasion of Ukraine, adding that such distortion erodes
   understanding of the Holocaust.

   Also today, the Assembly passed five draft resolutions on
   country-specific situations. Numerous delegates broadly rejected
   country-specific texts, with Iran's delegate noting that such drafts
   are supported by countries with the darkest human rights records. The
   resolution on the situation in Iran does not concern the protection of
   human rights; instead, it aims to exert political pressure, she
   stressed, criticizing attempts to marginalize Iran through exploitation
   of United Nations mechanisms.

   Similarly, the representative of the Democratic People's Republic of
   Korea, condemning the draft on the human rights situation in his
   country, criticized the United States and Western countries for abusing
   human rights issues as a political tool for interfering in internal
   affairs of other countries.

   Three resolutions were adopted on questions relating to refugees,
   returnees and internally displaced persons. The text on the Office of
   the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) -- adopted by
   consensus -- had the Assembly express deep concern at the increasing
   number of people who are forcibly displaced due to conflict,
   persecution and climate. Stressing the importance of
   responsibility-sharing, the Assembly urged States to uphold the
   civilian and humanitarian character of camps for refugees and allow
   unhindered access for UNHCR.

   This year, the Assembly adopted by consensus a new text on protecting
   children from sexual exploitation. By its terms, the Assembly voiced
   concern over the threat posed by "self-generated" child sexual abuse
   materials produced through coercion, as well as linkages between child
   sexual exploitation and trafficking in children for commercial sexual
   exploitation. It urged States to criminalize all forms of child sexual
   exploitation and abuse, including online, and provide tools to identify
   victims and bring perpetrators to justice.

   A draft resolution on the world drug problem -- adopted by a recorded
   vote of 124 in favour to 9 against (Belarus, Cameroon, Iran, Nicaragua,
   Niger, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Syria and Türkiye), with 45
   abstentions -- sparked controversy, with some delegates interpreting
   the text as a roll-over, while others refused to recognize it as the
   annual omnibus resolution due to extensive revisions.

   In its one decision of the day, the Assembly adopted the work programme
   of its Third Committee for the seventy-eighth session.

   Also speaking today were representatives of Nicaragua, Belarus, Saint
   Kitts and Nevis, Singapore, Cuba, Syria, Venezuela, Maldives,
   Philippines and Oman (on behalf of the Gulf Cooperation Council).

   The Assembly will next meet at 3 p.m. on Friday, 16 December, to
   continue its work.

   Action on Third Committee Draft Resolutions

   SALINI GUNGARAM (Mauritius), Rapporteur of the Third Committee,
   introduced the following reports of that body: Social development
   (document [17]A/77/455); Advancement of women (document [18]A/77/456);
   Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, questions
   relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian
   questions (document [19]A/77/457); Report of the Human Rights Council
   (document [20]A/77/458); Promotion and protection of the rights of
   children (document [21]A/77/459); Rights of indigenous peoples
   (document [22]A/77/460); Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
   xenophobia and related intolerance (document [23]A/77/461); and Right
   of peoples to self-determination (document [24]A/77/462).

   She went on to present the Committee's reports on: Promotion and
   protection of human rights (document [25]A/77/463); Implementation of
   human rights instruments (document [26]A/77/463/Add.1); Human rights
   questions, including alternative approaches for improving the effective
   enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (document
   [27]A/77/463/Add.2); Human rights situations and reports of special
   rapporteurs and representatives (document [28]A/77/463/Add.3);
   Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Vienna Declaration
   and Programme of Action (document [29]A/77/463/Add.4); Crime prevention
   and criminal justice (document [30]A/77/464); Countering the use of
   information and communications technologies for criminal purposes
   (document [31]A/77/465); International drug control (document
   [32]A/77/466); Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
   (document [33]A/77/467); and Programme planning (document
   [34]A/77/468).

   The General Assembly first took up the report on Social Development,
   which contains five draft resolutions.

   The Assembly then adopted draft resolution I on "Implementation of the
   outcome of the World Summit for Social Development and of the
   twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly". By its terms,
   the Assembly expressed deep concern over persistent feminization of
   poverty, which increases vulnerability to trafficking in persons in
   least developed countries. It also expressed deep concern that the
   COVID-19 pandemic continues to have a devastating impact on sustainable
   development, disproportionately affecting people in vulnerable
   situations. Further, the Assembly urged Member States to strengthen
   social policies, paying attention to needs of marginalized social
   groups, including people living with HIV/AIDS, Indigenous Peoples and
   refugees.

   Next, the Assembly adopted draft resolution II on "Inclusive
   development for and with persons with disabilities" without a vote,
   expressing grave concern that persons with disabilities continue to
   experience intersecting forms of discrimination. It stressed the
   importance of mainstreaming the rights and participation of persons
   with disabilities into all relevant strategies and programmes for
   sustainable development. Further, it urged Member States to ensure that
   persons with disabilities and their families have access to support
   services and information on how to recognize and report exploitation,
   violence and abuse.

   The Assembly then adopted draft resolution III on "Follow-up to the
   Second World Assembly on Ageing" without a vote, expressing concern
   that health systems are not prepared to respond to the needs of the
   ageing population and that older persons rate of poverty has increased
   due to global economic crises. The Assembly expressed further concern
   that older women are at greater risk of physical and psychological
   abuse and violence, reiterating that their needs and perspectives must
   be considered in disaster risk reduction. The Assembly urged Member
   States to develop and strengthen programmes promoting healthy and
   active ageing and the prevention and control of non-communicable
   diseases for older persons.

   The Assembly then adopted draft resolution III on "Follow-up to the
   Second World Assembly on Ageing" without a vote, (document
   A/C.3/L.10/Rev.1), expressing concern that health systems are not
   prepared to respond to the needs of the ageing population and that
   older persons' rate of poverty has increased due to global economic
   crises. The Assembly expressed further concern that older women are at
   greater risk of physical and psychological abuse and violence,
   reiterating that their needs and perspectives must be considered in
   disaster risk reduction. The Assembly urged Member States to develop
   and strengthen programmes promoting healthy and active ageing and the
   prevention and control of non-communicable diseases for older persons.

   Adopting draft resolution IV on "Preparations for and observance of the
   thirtieth anniversary of the International Year of the Family" without
   a vote, the Assembly called on Member States to support working parents
   through, inter alia, expanded child and family benefits as well as paid
   family and sick leave. It further called on Member States and United
   Nations bodies to provide information on their activities, including
   good practices at the national level.

   The Assembly next adopted draft resolution V on "Literacy for life:
   shaping future agendas" without a vote,stressingthe importance of
   children and youth returning to school who have not yet gone back due
   to the COVID-19 pandemic. It expressed deep concern about the gender
   gap in education, as nearly two-thirds of the world's non-literate
   adults are women. The Assembly expressed further concern that one-third
   of children not attending school have disabilities and that the
   literacy rate among adults with disabilities is as low as 3 per cent in
   some countries. It urged Member States to ensure training for
   educational professionals in digital literacy and access to remote
   learning platforms to provide distance learning opportunities in
   developing countries.

   The Assembly then turned to the report on the Advancement of Women,
   which contains four draft resolutions.

   The Assembly adopted resolution I on "Intensification of efforts to
   prevent and eliminate all forms of violence against women and girls:
   gender stereotypes and negative social norms", as orally revised, by a
   vote of 170 in favour, 1 against (Iran) with 8 abstentions (Algeria,
   Belarus, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Gabon, Libya,
   Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Syria). By its terms, the Assembly
   expressed deep concern that violence against women and girls is
   underreported, reinforcing gender inequality and corresponding
   impunity, and that historical inequalities and disregard for women's
   dignity are primary causes of marital rape and other forms of physical
   and psychological violence that reinforce the lower status of girls and
   adolescent girls in society.

   Further, the Assembly expressed alarm that violence against women and
   girls, including femicide, is among the least punished crimes due to
   gender bias in the judiciary and law enforcement. It urged States to
   strongly condemn all forms of violence against women and girls on and
   offline and reaffirmed that traditions or religious customs do not
   exempt them from its elimination. It urged States to implement
   legislation empowering women by guaranteeing full and equal access to
   education and health services.

   Adopting draft resolution II on "Trafficking in women and girls"
   without a vote, the Assembly expressed serious concern that an
   increasing number of women and girls are being trafficked to both
   developed and developing countries for sexual exploitation and organ
   removal. It also expressed concern about use of the Internet for forced
   child labour, marriage and child sexual exploitation as well as
   increasing activities of transnational criminal organizations profiting
   from human trafficking. Further, it strongly urged Governments to
   ensure coherence between laws and measures related to migration, labour
   and human trafficking to protect the human rights of migrant women and
   girls throughout migration, employment and repatriation processes.

   Next, the Assembly adopted draft resolution III on "Intensifying global
   efforts for the elimination of female genital mutilation" without a
   vote, expressing deep concern that a tremendous gap in resources
   continues to severely limit programmes on the elimination of female
   genital mutilation. It also called on States parties to focus on
   prevention strategies eliminating harmful practices that negatively
   affect women and girls, and to develop awareness-raising campaigns on
   the harmful effects of female genital mutilation.

   The Committee then adopted draft resolution IV titled "Intensification
   of efforts to end obstetric fistula" without a vote. By its terms, the
   Assembly stressed interlinkages between factors, including poverty and
   forced marriage, as root causes of obstetric fistula, and that it can
   be a cause of devastating lifelong morbidity if left untreated.It would
   express deep concern about the marginalization of women and girls,
   resulting in various forms of sexual and economic exploitation and
   abuse, which can increase the risk of obstetric fistula.

   Further, the Assembly expressed deep concern that significant
   challenges require the intensification of efforts at all levels to end
   obstetric fistula, and about the insufficient resources for addressing
   obstetric fistula in high-burden countries.It would request the
   Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report with disaggregated
   data on obstetric fistula and challenges faced by Member States in
   implementing the present resolution to the General Assembly at its
   seventy-ninth session under the item "Advancement of women".

   The Assembly next took up the Report of the United Nations High
   Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), questions relating to refugees,
   returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian questions, which
   contains three draft resolutions.

   Adopting draft resolution I on "Enlargement of the Executive Committee
   of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for
   Refugees"without a vote, it decided to increase the number of members
   of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High
   Commissioner for Refugees from 107 to 108 States. It requested the
   Economic and Social Council to elect the additional member at a meeting
   of its management segment in 2023.

   The Assembly then adopted draft resolution II on "Office of the United
   Nations High Commissioner for Refugees" by consensus, expressing deep
   concern at the increasing number of people who are forcibly displaced,
   including from conflict, persecution and climate. It also expressed
   concern over challenges associated with hosting refugees in national
   systems, given stretched resources, and stressed the importance of
   responsibility-sharing among States. It expressed deep concern about
   increasing threats to the security of humanitarian aid workers and
   strongly condemned attacks on refugees and asylum-seekers.

   Further, the Assembly urged States to uphold the civilian and
   humanitarian character of camps and settlements for refugees and allow
   unhindered access to them for the UNHCR. It expressed grave concern at
   the large number of asylum-seekers who have lost their lives trying to
   reach safety and the unprecedented scale of the global food crisis.
   Further, the Assembly expressed grave concern over the negative
   long-term impact of continued cuts in food rations and called on donors
   to ensure sustained support for the UNHCR and World Food Programme
   (WFP).

   Also adopting draft resolution III on "Assistance to refugees,
   returnees and displaced persons in Africa" without a vote, the Assembly
   expressed grave concern about the rising number of refugees and
   displaced persons on the African continent, funding gaps in the UNHCR
   and World Health Organization (WHO) budgets and deteriorating living
   conditions in many refugee camps. It expressed further concern over the
   decreasing trend in resettlement opportunities for displaced persons.

   Also by the text, the Assembly called on the international community to
   take concrete action to meet the needs of refugees and contribute
   generously to projects and programmes to create durable solutions. It
   also condemned all acts that pose a threat to the security of refugees
   and asylum-seekers, such as refoulement or physical attacks. It called
   on UNHCR, African Union and African States to strengthen partnerships
   to support the protection system for refugees.

   Turning next to the "Report of the Human Rights Council,"and a draft
   resolution of the same name, the Assembly adopted the textby a recorded
   vote of 115 in favour to 3 against (Belarus, Israel, Nicaragua), with
   59 abstentions, taking note of the report, including the addendum
   thereto, and its recommendations.

   Speaking before the vote, the representative of Venezuela stressed the
   importance of the Human Rights Council amid global challenges,
   including reconstruction after the COVID-19 pandemic. Warning against
   politization of human rights and the negative impact of unilateral
   coercive measures on such rights, he said the Body should continue its
   work in a balanced and impartial way, in a spirit of dialogue with all
   States. He disassociated from and rejected the imposition of
   instruments and mechanisms that are established without the consent of
   Venezuela.

   The Assembly then took up the report on "Promotion and protection of
   the rights of children", which contains two draft resolutions.

   It adopted draft resolution I on "Protecting children from bullying"
   without a vote, calling on States to protect children from all forms of
   violence and provide appropriate support. It also called on States to
   invest in education and digital literacy that will ensure children's
   safety online, analyse statistical data and provide information on
   disabilities regarding bullying.

   By further terms, the Assembly called on States to adopt legislation to
   prevent bullying and strengthen the skills of professionals working
   with children in early detection and response. It urged States to
   ensure that schools address all forms of violence against children,
   particularly girls.

   The Assembly then adopted without a vote draft resolution II on "Child,
   early and forced marriage", urging States to enact laws to end such
   practices and repeal provisions that enable perpetrators of rape or
   abduction to escape prosecution by marrying their victims. It also
   called on States to ensure the timely registration of births and
   marriages and promote meaningful participation of children and
   adolescents in issues affecting them.

   By further terms, the Assembly urged Governments to tackle poverty,
   lack of economic opportunities and other drivers of child, early and
   forced marriage, including barriers to education. Further, it urged
   States to address root causes of gender inequality, drivers of violence
   and unequal power relations in which women and girls are viewed as
   subordinate.

   Next, the Assembly turned to the report on "Rights of Indigenous
   Peoples" (document A/77/460), containing one draft resolution of the
   same name.

   Acting without a vote, it adopted the draft, expressing deep concern
   that suicide rates in Indigenous Peoples' communities are often
   significantly higher than in the general population. It also stressed
   the urgent need to enhance Indigenous Peoples' adaptive capacity to
   climate change and support their efforts to address it.

   Also by the text, the Assembly urged States to ensure the safety of
   Indigenous Peoples, promoting an enabling environment, in which human
   rights violations are prevented, perpetrators held accountable and
   access to justice and remedy ensured. It also urged Governments to
   ensure that Indigenous Peoples are not forcibly removed from their
   territories and that no relocation takes place without their free,
   prior and informed consent.

   The Assembly then took up its report on "Elimination of racism, racial
   discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance", which contains two
   draft resolutions.

   Taking the floor before the action, the representative of Cuba
   expressed his country's commitment to the elimination of racism in all
   its forms. Nazism is no exception, he said. Noting and condemning the
   alarming spread of such racist ideology, he said that nothing justifies
   promoting racist or xenophobic ideas. Although the delegation has
   co-sponsored the draft for many years, it must dissociate new operative
   paragraph 3, he said, recalling the adoption of amendment L. 52, which
   he said was divisive and targeting. The text could also highlight
   neo-Nazism in the United States, he stressed.

   It then adopted draft resolution I on "Combating glorification of
   Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices that contribute to fueling
   contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
   related intolerance" as orally revised and amended, by a vote of 120 in
   favour and 50 against, with 10 abstentions (Afghanistan, Ecuador,
   Myanmar, Palau, Panama, Papau New Guinea, Samoa, Switzerland, Republic
   of Korea and Türkiye).

   By its terms, the Assembly expressed alarm at the spread in many parts
   of the world of various extremist political parties, movements and
   ideologies, including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups. It noted with
   concern that the presence of extreme right-wing ideologues can inject
   into political discourse the same ideologies that make neo-Nazism and
   extremism so dangerous. The Assembly also expressed deep concern about
   the glorification of the Nazi movement, neo-Nazism and former members
   of the Waffen SS organization, which include erecting monuments and
   holding public demonstrations on the Nazi past.

   Further, the Assembly condemned incidents that glorify Nazism, such as
   acts involving pro-Nazi graffiti and paintings, including on monuments
   dedicated to victims of the Second World War. It expressed alarm over
   the use by extremist groups, including neo-Nazi groups, of the Internet
   and social media to recruit new members, especially targeting children
   and young people, and disseminate their hate-filled messages. The
   Assembly also condemned any denial of the Holocaust as well as
   manifestation of religious intolerance or violence based on ethnic
   origin or religious belief.

   Speaking after the adoption, the representative of Venezuela thanked
   the Russian Federation for presenting the draft on combatting Nazism,
   which he said was timely. He added that the amendment to the draft was
   hostile, undermining and politicizing the content of the amendment. His
   delegation dissociated from operative paragraph 3, but supports the
   rest of the resolution, he said.

   The representative of the Russian Federation said this generation is
   the last that will include living veterans of the Second World War. He
   said the vote was shocking, adding that, for the first time in the
   history of the United Nations, former Axis powers voted against a text
   condemning Nazism. Germany, Japan and Italy have committed blasphemy
   against victims of German Nazism, Italian Fascism and Japanese
   militarism, he stressed.

   Such fighting against members of the anti-Hitler coalition makes clear
   that discussions on hostile States are premature, he continued, asking
   the Assembly if these actions truly condemn the military operation in
   Ukraine. Saying that it does not, he decried the mentality of the
   ruling elite and noted that such delegations rewrite history. Recalling
   that the resolution is thematic and not country-specific, he rejected
   operative paragraph 4 condemning Moscow's military operation in Ukraine
   -- where Nazism is supported at a state-level, he added. Denazification
   is not a pretext, but a goal of the military operation and the Russian
   Federation will lead to its very end, he said.

   The representative of China reiterated her firm opposition to attempts
   to deny, distort and falsify the history of the Second World War; her
   firm opposition to acts of glorifying Nazism, fascism and militarism
   and acts fuelling their resurgence; and her opposition of all forms of
   racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and intolerance. She said the
   practice of adding country-specific content to thematic resolutions by
   means of amendments is inconsistent with the established practice of
   the Third Committee. Among sponsors of the respective amendment, there
   are certain countries that seek to falsify the history of the Second
   World War and refuse to admit such war crimes as massive sexual
   violence, she stressed, expressing concern about the practice of a
   small number of countries creating division and politicizing relevant
   agenda items. In view of the above, she disassociated herself from the
   consensus on operative paragraph 3.

   The representative of Nicaragua reiterated her disassociation from
   operative paragraph 3, which was amended and included in draft
   resolution I.

   The representative of Belarus reiterated his country's vigorous efforts
   to preserve historic memory. He recalled that Belarus paid with the
   lives of millions of its inhabitants to eradicate Nazism. Opposing
   attempts to politicize this topic, he disassociated himself from
   operative paragraph 4, which was introduced as a politically motivated
   amendment.

   The representative of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
   welcoming adoption of "L.5", voiced deep concern over its amended
   contents, which have nothing to do with combatting Nazism, neo-Nazism
   and other forms of racism. It only seeks selective approaches by
   politicizing issues and targeting individual countries. Reiterating his
   country's opposition to politicization, selectivity and double
   standards, he disassociated from operative paragraph 3.

   The representative of Sri Lanka stressed that it is incumbent upon all
   Member States to give life to the letter and spirit of the Durban
   Declaration and Programme of Action in all activities. Operative
   paragraph 4 politicizes the issue of combatting racism, racial
   discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and introduces a
   narrow, restrictive, country-specific approach. Disassociating with
   operative paragraph 4, he called on all parties to adhere to the
   principles of universality, impartiality, non-selectivity and
   objectivity in the promotion and protection of human rights.

   The representative of Ukraine reminded all that his country fought
   fascism and Nazism during the Second World War, with millions of
   Ukrainians sacrificing their lives. In response to the Russian
   Federation, he quoted the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
   Rights, who presented his report today. "Russian soldiers executed
   civilians in makeshift places of detention. Others were summarily
   executed on the spot following security checks in their houses, yards
   and doorways, even where the victim had shown clearly that they were
   not a threat, for example by holding their hands in the air. There are
   strong indicators that the summary executions by the Russians in
   Ukraine, documented in the report, may constitute the war crime of
   wilful killing." This is the fascism of today, the glorification of
   fascism and Nazism being executed by the Russian Federation and what
   the international community must stop, he stressed. Turning to
   operative paragraph 4, he noted that it does not speak about the
   special operation but rather the Russian Federation's endeavours to
   justify its military invasion and territorial aggression on the
   purported basis of eliminating neo-Nazism. "That is why we do not allow
   rapists to lecture us about how to fight rape", he emphasized.

   The representative of the Czech Republic, speaking on behalf of the
   European Union, recalled that, for many European countries, the end of
   the Second World War did not bring freedom but further occupation and
   crimes against humanity by other totalitarian regimes. Rejecting the
   term denazification, used by the Russian Federation to justify its
   illegal invasion of Ukraine, she said such distortion erodes
   understanding of the Holocaust. Reiterating her commitment to the
   global fight against racism, xenophobia and temporary forms of all
   extremist ideologies, including neo-Nazism, she noted that member
   States of the European Union will vote against the resolution.

   The representative of the United States categorically condemned the
   glorification of Nazism. Describing the resolution as an attempt to
   legitimize long-standing disinformation narratives, she stressed that
   Moscow's resolution is not a serious effort to combat Nazism and
   antisemitism; instead, it is a shameful ploy to justify its war of
   aggression in Ukraine. The United States fully supported the amendment
   that passed and became a part of the adopted resolution, she recalled,
   categorically rejecting the notion that the draft has turned into a
   country-specific resolution.

   Next, it adopted draft resolution II on "A global call for concrete
   action for the elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
   and related intolerance and the comprehensive implementation of and
   followup to the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action" by a vote
   of 129 in favour, 17 against with 36 abstentions. By its terms, the
   Assembly expressed profound regret over evils inflicted on millions as
   a result of slavery, colonialism, apartheid, genocide and past
   tragedies, and called on States that have not already done so to
   dispense reparatory justice. It also requested the Secretary-General to
   include in his report on implementation of this resolution a section on
   revitalizing the trust fund for the Programme for the Decade for Action
   to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination.

   The Assembly then took up the report on "Right of peoples to
   self-determination", which contains three draft resolutions.

   It adopted by a recorded vote of 130 in favour to 52 against, with 4
   abstentions (Mexico, Liberia, Palau, Switzerland), draft resolution I
   on "Use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and
   impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination".By
   its terms, the Assembly urged States to take legislative measures to
   ensure their territories and others under their control are not used
   for, and that their nationals do not take part in, the recruitment,
   financing or transit of mercenaries for activities designed to impede
   the right of peoples to self-determination, destabilize or overthrow
   Governments or impair the territorial integrity or political unity of
   sovereign States.

   Further, the Assembly requested States to exercise vigilance against
   any kind of hiring or financing of mercenaries by private companies
   offering international military consultancy and security services, and
   to impose specific bans on companies intervening in armed conflicts to
   destabilize constitutional regimes.

   The Assembly then adopted without a vote draft resolution II on
   "Universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination",
   expressing deep concern about acts of foreign military intervention and
   occupation to suppress the right to self-determination of peoples and
   nations. It expressed grave concern that millions of people have been
   or are being uprooted from their homes as refugees and displaced
   persons due to such interventions. It called on those States
   responsible to cease their military interventions in and occupation of
   foreign countries and territories as well as the brutal methods
   employed against the populations during them.

   Next, the Assembly adopted by a recorded vote of 167 in favour to 6
   against (Chad, Israel, Marshall Islands, Federated States of
   Micronesia, Nauru, United States), with 9 abstentions (Cameroon,
   Guatemala, Kiribati, Malawi, Palau, Rwanda, Solomon Islands, Togo,
   Tuvalu), draft resolution III on "The right of the Palestinian people
   to self-determination". By the draft, it stressed the urgency of ending
   Israeli occupation of the Occupied Palestinian Territory, which began
   in 1967, as well as a just, lasting peace settlement between the
   Palestinian and Israeli sides, based on relevant resolutions of the
   United Nations and the Madrid terms of reference, including the Arab
   Peace Initiative and Quartet Road map to a permanent two-State solution
   to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. It also stressed the need to
   respect the territorial integrity of the Occupied Palestinian
   Territory, including East Jerusalem. Further, the Assembly urged all
   States and the United Nations to continue to support and assist the
   Palestinian people in the early realization of their right to
   self-determination.

   The Assembly then turned to its report on "Promotion and protection of
   human rights", which contains no draft resolutions. The Assembly took
   note of the report.

   Next, the Assembly took up its report on "Promotion and protection of
   human rights; implementation of human rights instruments", which
   contains two draft resolutions.

   It adopted without a vote draft resolution I on "Torture and other
   cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment", condemning all
   forms of torture and other cruel treatment and any attempt to legalize
   such acts, including on grounds of national security, counter-terrorism
   or through judicial decisions. It also emphasized that acts of torture
   and cruel treatment in armed conflict are serious violations of
   international humanitarian law constituting war crimes, that acts of
   torture can constitute crimes against humanity and that the
   perpetrators must be prosecuted. Further, the Assembly urged States not
   to transfer a person to another State where they would be in danger of
   being subjected to torture.

   Also by the text, the Assembly called on States to adopt measures to
   prevent torture and cruel treatment, particularly in the context of the
   use of force by law enforcement officials and in places of detention.
   It would also urge States to ensure that prolonged incommunicado
   detention and secret places of detention and interrogation are
   abolished. The Assembly also urged States to ensure that no authority
   tolerates sanctions or reprisals against any person, group or
   association seeking to contact stakeholders combating torture and
   ensure accountability for such acts.

   The Assembly then adopted draft resolution II titled "Human rights
   treaty body system", by which it would invite the Chairs of the human
   rights treaty bodies to engage in an interactive dialogue at the
   Assembly's seventy-eighth and seventy-ninth sessions. It would
   encourage all stakeholders to continue their efforts for the full
   implementation of resolution 68/268 on "Strengthening and enhancing the
   effective functioning of the human rights treaty body system". Also by
   the text, the Assembly would note that the COVID-19 pandemic showed the
   need to strengthen the capacity of the treaty bodies to interact online
   as well as the potential of digitalization for improved efficiency of
   such bodies and the interaction with stakeholders.

   Next, the Assembly took up the report on "Human rights questions,
   including alternative approaches for improving the effective enjoyment
   of human rights and fundamental freedoms", which contains 15 draft
   resolutions.

   Speaking in explanation of position before the vote, the representative
   of Maldives said that while the death penalty is a form of punishment
   that can be prescribed under the laws of his country, Maldives has
   maintained an informal moratorium on that. His Government will take
   substantial steps to implement positive and meaningful changes to its
   judiciary and to align domestic legal instruments with international
   obligations. While the death penalty remains on the books, the
   government understands that the country's criminal justice system must
   be reformed, he said.

   The representative of Oman speaking on behalf of the Gulf Cooperation
   Council, stressed that it is important to respect the sovereignty of
   countries as stipulated in the Charter. The death penalty is part of
   many national legislations and of the sovereign practices of the
   countries in her group. Also highlighting operative paragraph one as a
   cornerstone for entering into any discussions about the death penalty,
   she added that all countries have the right to implement their own
   domestic laws to ensure their security.

   It then adopted without a vote draft resolution I on "The right to
   privacy in the digital age", calling on States to protect the right to
   privacy, including in the context of digital communications and new and
   emerging technologies. It also called on States to regularly review
   their procedures regarding the surveillance of communications, the use
   of profiling, automated decision-making, machine learning and biometric
   technologies. The Assembly further called on States to develop policies
   to ensure that all business enterprises respect the right to privacy in
   the design of technologies.

   The Assembly then adopted by a recorded vote of 132 in favour and 25
   against, with 28 abstentions, draft resolution II on "The right to
   development",stressing the need to increase the participation of
   developing countries in international decision-making. It also
   expressed concern about increasing cases of human rights abuses by
   transnational corporations, underlined the need to ensure justice and
   underscored that these entities must contribute to the right to
   development.

   Also by the text, the Assembly expressed deep concern about the
   negative impact that the aggravated economic and social situation has
   on the right to development, particularly in developing countries. It
   urged developed countries to meet the targets of 0.7 per cent of their
   gross national product (GNP) for official development assistance (ODA)
   to developing countries and 0.15 to 0.2 per cent of their GNP to the
   least developed countries. Further, it emphasized the urgent need to
   take measures to combat corruption at all levels.

   Without a vote, the Assembly then adopted draft resolution III on
   "Enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human
   rights".By the text, it urged all international actors to reject all
   doctrines of exclusion based on racism, racial discrimination,
   xenophobia and related intolerance. It emphasized the importance of the
   Universal Periodic Review as a mechanism based on cooperation, and the
   need for a constructive approach by all stakeholders to resolve human
   rights issues in international forums. Further, the Assembly urged
   States to take measures necessary to enhance bilateral, regional and
   international cooperation to address the adverse impact of compounded
   global crises on human rights.

   Next, the Assembly took up draft resolution IV on "Human rights and
   unilateral coercive measures" by a recorded vote of 130 in favour and
   53 against, with 1 abstention (Brazil). By the text, it expressed deep
   concern about States facing both unilateral coercive measures and the
   impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. It urged States to cease adopting
   unilateral measures counter to international law and refrain from
   applying unilateral trade measures that impede sustainable economic
   development. Further, the Assembly condemned including Member States in
   unilateral lists under false pretexts, such as terrorism sponsorship,
   and strongly objected to the extraterritorial nature of measures
   threatening the sovereignty of States.

   Also by the text, the Assembly requested the Secretary-General and
   United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to provide necessary
   resources for the Special Rapporteur's mandate, and that the Rapporteur
   submit a report on implementation of the present resolution and the
   negative impact of unilateral coercive measures to the General Assembly
   at its seventy-eighth session.

   By a recorded vote of 122 in favour and 54 against, with 10 abstentions
   (Armenia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Liberia, Mexico, Panama,
   Peru, Uruguay), the Assembly then adopted draft resolution V on
   "Promotion of a democratic and equitable international order". By its
   terms, it expressed deep concern that the current global economic,
   climate and food crises widen the gap between developed and developing
   countries. It also expressed deep concern about uneven access to
   COVID-19 vaccines for developing countries, emphasizing that an
   equitable approach enhances the capacities of all countries to have
   equal access to vaccines. It urged all actors to build an order based
   on inclusion, solidarity, mutual universal human rights and to reject
   all doctrines of exclusion based on racism, xenophobia and related
   intolerance.

   Next, the Assembly adopted draft resolution VI on "Promotion of peace
   as a vital requirement for the full enjoyment of all human rights by
   all" by a recorded vote of 131 in favour and 53 against, with 1
   abstention (Brazil), stressing that the deep fault line dividing human
   society into rich and poor and ever-increasing gap between the
   developed and developing worlds pose a major threat to global
   prosperity, peace and security and stability. It also emphasized that
   promotion of peace demands that policies of States be directed towards
   elimination of the threat of war, particularly nuclear war,
   renunciation of the use or threat of use of force in international
   relations and settlement of international disputes by peaceful means.

   Adopting draft resolution VII on "The right to food" without a vote,
   the Assembly expressed deep concern that over 2.3 billion people in the
   world experience moderate or severe food insecurity. Further, it
   expressed alarm that, in 2021, the number of people who had no access
   to adequate food rose to 3.1 billion, and that between 702 million and
   828 million people faced hunger.

   Also by the text, the Assembly expressed deep concern that, while women
   contribute over 50 per cent of the food produced worldwide, they
   represent 70 per cent of the world's hungry. It called on States to
   take measures to combat undernutrition in mothers and children and
   eliminate preventable mortality and morbidity of children under 5.
   Further, it called on States to combat the causes of hunger among
   Indigenous Peoples.

   Next, the Assembly adopted by a recorded vote of 133 in favour and,
   none against, with 44 abstentions, draft resolution VIII on
   "Extrajudicial, Summary or Arbitrary Executions," noting with deep
   concern that impunity can perpetuate extrajudicial, summary or
   arbitrary executions and femicide and that such executions are
   committed against persons exercising their rights, including to
   peaceful assembly and freedom of expression. Further, it urged States
   to take necessary measures to ensure the safety and security of
   national and international humanitarian personnel. The Assembly also
   requested the Secretary-General to offer appropriate resources to
   Special Rapporteurs to carry out their mandates, including through
   country visits.

   Without a vote, the Assembly then adopted draft resolution IX on "Human
   Rights in the Administration of Justice", urging States to ensure the
   meaningful participation of women at all levels and equal access to
   justice. It also urged States to reduce pretrial detention and
   eliminate discrimination in law and practice against persons who are in
   vulnerable situations or marginalized. In addition, it urged States to
   ensure that neither capital punishment nor life imprisonment without
   the possibility of release nor corporal punishment is imposed for
   offences committed by persons under 18 years of age. Further, it called
   on States to ensure effective access to justice for persons with
   disabilities.

   Following that, without a vote, the Assembly adopted draft resolution X
   on "Missing persons", calling on States parties to armed conflict to
   prevent persons from going missing, account for persons reported
   missing and ensure investigations and accountability. It also urged
   States to avoid harming civilians who prevent persons from going
   missing in armed conflict, including by minimizing military use of
   civilian infrastructure. Further, it called on States to determine the
   fate of the missing and provide family members with all information.

   The Assembly then adopted without a vote draft resolution XI on
   "Freedom of religion or belief", expressing serious concern over acts
   of violence based on religion and the increasing number and intensity
   of such incidents. Further, it expressed concern that State and
   non-State actors encourage violence against religious minorities as
   well as by an increasing number of laws that limit the freedom of
   thought, religion or belief.

   Also by the text, the Assembly expressed serious concern about attacks
   on religious sites and shrines, including those carried out in
   connection with incitement to national, racial or religious hatred. It
   strongly condemned any advocacy of hatred based on religion in any form
   of media.

   Next, by a recorded vote of 125 in favour to 37 against, with 22
   abstentions, the Assembly adopted draft resolution XII on "Moratorium
   on the use of the death penalty", as amended, expressing deep concern
   about continued application of the death penalty. It called on States
   to make available information on their use of the death penalty and any
   scheduled executions, ensuring that trials leading to its imposition
   comply with internationally recognized fair-trial guarantees. Further,
   the Assembly called on States to progressively restrict use of the
   death penalty and ensure that those facing it can exercise their right
   to apply for pardon or commutation.

   The Assembly also called on States to ensure that inmates, their
   children, families and legal representatives are provided with adequate
   information about their detention and pending execution to allow a last
   visit or communication, the return of the body for burial or
   information about where the body is located. In addition, it called on
   States to ensure the death penalty is not applied based on
   discriminatory laws, improve conditions in detention and establish a
   moratorium on executions with a view to abolishing the death penalty.

   The Assembly then adopted draft resolution XIII on "Human rights and
   extreme poverty"without a vote, expressing concern that the total
   number of persons living in extreme poverty remains unacceptably high
   as well as over non-income dimensions of poverty, such as access to
   equitable quality education or basic health services. It also expressed
   concern over the increase of people living in poverty due to food,
   economic and climate crises and their negative effect on the capacity
   of States to fight extreme poverty. Further, the Assembly called on
   Member States to remove obstacles that people in poverty face in areas
   such as housing, employment, education, health and other social
   services, as well as legal frameworks that discriminate based on
   socioeconomic status.

   The Assembly then adopted without a vote resolution XIV on "The role of
   Ombudsman and mediator institutions in the promotion and protection of
   human rights, good governance and the rule of law".By its terms, the
   Assembly would note with serious concern that Ombudsman and mediator
   institutions experience threats to their autonomy or security. It would
   stress the importance of the financial and administrative independence
   of these institutions, and that they play an important role in advising
   Governments' national policies, bringing them in line with their
   international human rights obligations. The Assembly would also request
   the Secretary-General to report on the implementation of the present
   resolution to the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session and to
   the Human Rights Council at its fifty-fourth session.

   Following that, the Assembly adopted draft resolution XV on "Combating
   intolerance, negative stereotyping, stigmatization, discrimination,
   incitement to violence and violence against persons, based on religion
   or belief" without a vote. By the text, it condemned criminal acts
   committed by extremist groups against persons based on their religion
   or belief, expressing deep concern about the prevalence of impunity by
   perpetrators. It also expressed deep concern at continued instances of
   derogatory stereotyping and stigmatization of persons based on their
   religion or belief, as well as agendas pursued by extremist individuals
   and organizations perpetuating negative stereotypes about religious
   groups. Further, it condemned any advocacy of religious hatred inciting
   hostility or violence in the media and called on States to adopt
   policies to protect places of worship, cemeteries and shrines if they
   are vulnerable to vandalism or destruction.

   The representative for Saint Kitts and Nevis, explaining her country's
   vote against draft resolution XII, underscored the significance of a
   comprehensive and just criminal system. Her Government applies the
   death penalty only as a punishment for the most heinous crimes after
   extensive due process, ensures its national laws are in line with
   international law provisions and firmly believes that application of
   the death penalty is a criminal justice issue within its justification.
   Situations of abuse, she reminded, may be treated as a human rights
   issue in relevant and already established tribunals instead of being
   politicized in the Third Committee. Although her country engaged in
   hopes of clarifying and correcting inaccurate and misleading
   assertions, it nevertheless is concerned by problematic content that
   remains. She voiced hope that there will be greater flexibility in the
   future in addressing such issues.

   The representative for Singapore, explaining his country's vote against
   the same draft, stressed that the resolution is inconsistent with
   international law by not acknowledging article VI of the International
   Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and omits the rights of victims
   and families. Further, it seeks to export a particular model of society
   to the rest of the world, undertakes a "one-size-fits-all" approach and
   does not acknowledge or respect the diversity of legal systems
   worldwide. Voicing his deep disappointment with the resolution's
   proponents, especially over their arbitrary deletion of an operative
   paragraph on States' sovereignty, he called on them to reflect
   carefully on their approach, abandon their attitude of "arrogance and
   cultural superiority", show respect for the principle of sovereignty
   and listen carefully to the diversity of positions on this issue. "The
   ball is in their court," he said, expressing hope that they will change
   their approach.

   The representative for the Philippines disassociated from all
   references to the International Criminal Court under agenda item 68.
   Her Government, she noted, withdrew from the Rome Statute in 2019 out
   of its principled stand against those who politicize human rights and
   disregard the Philippines' independent and well-functioning organs and
   agencies. Notwithstanding this withdrawal, she reaffirmed her country's
   commitment to the promotion and protection of human rights as well as
   the fight against impunity for atrocity crimes.

   The Assembly then took up its report on "Human rights situations and
   reports of special rapporteurs and representatives: report of the
   Committee", which contains five draft resolutions.

   The representative of the Russian Federation, speaking in explanation
   of vote before the vote, stressed that country resolutions have little
   to do with the overall situation in nations concerned. Instead, their
   goal is to further political agendas and wage political wars. They are
   characterized by unfounded accusations, lies and empty appeals, he
   said, adding that the content of these documents is becoming
   increasingly divorced from reality. Moreover, they discredit the United
   Nations human rights system based on the principle of equality of
   States. Regarding the draft on "Situation of human rights in the
   temporarily occupied Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of
   Sevastopol, Ukraine", he condemned Kyiv's hate-based policy towards its
   Russian-speaking population as well as its egregious human rights
   violations, including torture, killings and cultivation of neo-Nazism.
   A vote in favour would mean supporting military escalation, he
   asserted, noting that his delegation will vote against the escalation
   of the crisis and against the impunity of the Kyiv regime.

   The representative of Iran categorically rejected the draft resolution
   concerning her country, supported by those with the darkest human
   rights records. She criticized attempts to marginalize Iran through
   exploitation of United Nations mechanisms and deny Iranian women the
   opportunity to collaborate in the Commission on the Status of Women.
   This resolution does not concern the protection of human rights;
   instead, it aims to exert political pressure on Iran. The core value of
   multilateralism is violated to reach unilateralist aims, she cautioned,
   condemning the imposition of illegal unilateral coercive measures
   against independent countries like Iran. Canada cannot play the role of
   a saint regarding human rights, she said, also adding that the Israeli
   regime continues the practice of forced evictions, arbitrary detentions
   and torture. She called on States to adhere to the universal principles
   of objectivity, impartiality and non-selectivity.

   The representative of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
   condemned in the strongest terms the draft on the human rights
   situation in his country. He described the draft as a political
   provocation aimed at undermining the political system in the Democratic
   People's Republic of Korea that has nothing to do with genuine
   protection of human rights. The United States and Western countries are
   abusing human rights issues as a political tool for overthrowing
   systems of other countries. He reiterated his country's principled
   position against politization of human rights.

   Without a vote, the Assembly then adopted draft resolution I on
   "Situation of human rights in the Democratic People's Republic of
   Korea". By its terms, it expressed deep concern at the pervasive
   culture of impunity and lack of accountability for human rights
   violations and abuses in that country. It expressed serious concern
   about continuing reports of such abuses, including torture; sexual and
   gender-based violence; extrajudicial, summary and arbitrary executions;
   imposition of the death penalty for political and religious reasons;
   extrajudicial and arbitrary detention; and absence of due process and
   rule of law. The Assembly further expressed strong concern about
   political prison camps; enforced and involuntary disappearances of
   persons by arrest; and pervasive restrictions on freedoms of thought,
   religion, expression, peaceful assembly and the right to privacy.

   Also, by the text, the Assembly expressed deep concern about the
   prevalence of chronic and acute malnutrition among persons in the most
   vulnerable situations, exacerbated by a lack of access to basic
   services, including health care, clean water and sanitation. It
   strongly urged the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of
   Korea to immediately put an end to systematic and widespread violations
   of human rights; close political prison camps and release all political
   prisoners; and ensure that everyone within the territory enjoys the
   right to freedom of movement and is free to leave the country.

   Next, the Assembly adopted without a vote draft resolution II on
   "Situation of human rights of Rohingya Muslims and other minorities in
   Myanmar" , by which it condemned in the strongest terms all violations
   of human rights against civilians, including Rohingya Muslims and other
   minorities in Myanmar, perpetrated by security and armed forces, which
   amount to the gravest crimes under international law. It reiterated
   deep concern at continuing forced displacement of civilians;
   recruitment of children; abductions; arbitrary detentions; killings and
   maiming; and attacks on schools, hospitals, places of worship and large
   civilian gatherings. The Assembly further expressed deep concern over
   the use of hospitals and schools for military purposes as well as
   landmines, making conditions in Rakhine State unsuitable for the
   voluntary and safe return of refugees and forcibly displaced persons,
   including the Rohingya.

   Also by the text, the Assembly expressed deep concern that, in Rakhine,
   more than 600,000 Rohingya Muslims remain largely segregated and
   discriminated against in accessing citizenship and other fundamental
   rights, many of whom remain confined in camps with no freedom of
   movement. It also expressed alarm at continued attacks on medical and
   humanitarian actors and the lack of safe and unhindered humanitarian
   access. Further, the Assembly urgently called on Myanmar or the Myanmar
   Military to end immediately all violations of international law; ensure
   protection of human rights of all persons in Myanmar; and ensure full
   accountability and end impunity, starting with independent
   investigations. The Assembly requested the Secretary-General to extend
   the appointment of the Special Envoy on Myanmar and enable the Envoy on
   to discharge her mandate.

   The Assembly then adopted draft resolution III on "Situation of human
   rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran" by a recorded vote of 80 in
   favour and 29 against, with 65 abstentions. It expressed serious
   concern at the significant increase in use of the death penalty in
   Iran; disproportionate application of the death penalty to persons
   belonging to minorities; and continuing disregard for protections under
   Iranian law or internationally recognized safeguards relating to the
   death penalty. It strongly urged Iran to eliminate all forms of
   systemic discrimination and other human rights violations against women
   and girls; ensure women's and girls' equal protection and access to
   justice, including by prohibiting so-called honour killings and child,
   early and forced marriage; lift restrictions on women's and girls'
   equal access to primary and secondary education; and remove legal and
   cultural barriers to women's equal participation in the labour market
   and all aspects of economic, cultural and political life.

   The Assembly also expressed serious concern that the enforcement of the
   hijab and chastity law and its violent implementation by the Iranian
   morality police fundamentally undermines the human rights of women and
   girls. It strongly urged Iran to cease the use of excessive force
   against peaceful protestors, such as in the aftermath of Mahsa Amini's
   arbitrary arrest and subsequent death while in custody. Further, it
   called on Iran to eliminate all forms of discrimination based on
   thought, religion or belief, reiterating the importance of independent
   investigations for all allegations of human rights violations,
   including excessive use of force, arbitrary arrest, detention and
   torture. The Assembly also called on Iran to cooperate fully with the
   Special Rapporteur on human rights in Iran, including by accepting
   repeated requests to visit the country.

   By a recorded vote of 82 in favour and 14 against, with 80 abstentions,
   the Assembly then adopted resolution IV on "Situation of human rights
   in the temporarily occupied Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city
   of Sevastopol, Ukraine". By the text, it condemned the ongoing
   temporary occupation of Crimea by the Russian Federation as well as its
   unprovoked aggression against Ukraine. It also condemned the imposition
   and retroactive application of the Russian Federation's legal system;
   imposition of its automatic citizenship on protected persons in Crimea;
   and deportation, and effective restriction of land ownership of those
   who have rejected that citizenship.

   Further, the Assembly expressed deep concern about continued reports
   that the law enforcement system of the Russian Federation conducts
   searches and raids of private homes and businesses in Crimea, which
   disproportionally affect Crimean Tatars. It also condemned reported
   violations of international humanitarian law and human rights,
   including extrajudicial killings, abductions, enforced disappearances,
   politically motivated prosecutions, discrimination and violence. It
   expressed deep concern about restrictions faced by Ukrainians, in
   particular Crimean Tatars, in exercising their rights to work, the
   ability to maintain their identity and culture and the right to
   education in Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar languages.

   In this context, the Assembly demanded that the Russian Federation
   immediately end all violations of human rights and international
   humanitarian law against residents of the temporarily occupied Crimea;
   arbitrary detentions and arrests; enforced disappearances; torture and
   other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment; sexual and gender-based
   violence; and compelling apprehended persons to self-incriminate or
   "cooperate" with law enforcement. It also demanded that the Russian
   Federation ensure fair trial, revoke all discriminatory legislation and
   hold accountable those responsible for violations by ensuring
   independent investigations.

   Next, the Assembly adopted resolution V on "Situation of human rights
   in the Syrian Arab Republic" by a vote of 92 in favour and 14 against,
   with 71 abstentions. By the text, it strongly condemned the
   indiscriminate killing of civilians and continued indiscriminate use of
   heavy weapons and aerial bombardments, which have caused more than
   500,000 fatalities, including the killing of more than 29,000 children;
   starvation of civilians as a method of warfare; and use of chemical
   weapons. It noted with grave concern that the Office of the UNHCR has
   identified 306,887 civilians who were killed in the conflict in Syria
   between March 2011 and March 2022, including 26,727 women and 27,126
   children.

   Further, the Assembly expressed grave concern at the remaining presence
   of violent extremism and terrorist groups in Syria, expressing alarm
   that more than 5.6 million refugees have been forced to flee the
   country, and that 11.1 million people, of whom 6.6 million are
   internally displaced, require urgent humanitarian assistance, which has
   resulted in an influx of Syrian refugees into neighbouring countries,
   other countries in the region and beyond. It demanded that the Syrian
   regime and ISIL/Da'esh immediately desist from any further use of
   chemical weapons. The Assembly further called for the continuation of
   cross-border humanitarian support beyond January 2023 and for at least
   12 months. The Assembly also demanded that the Syrian regime cooperate
   fully with the Commission of Inquiry, including by granting it
   immediate and unhindered access throughout the country.

   Speaking in explanation of position after adoption, the representative
   of Ukraine pointed to forcible deportations, illegal detention,
   tortures, executions and other massive crimes against humanity
   committed by the Russian Federation. Thousands of Ukrainian prisoners
   of war and civilians remain in terrible conditions in detention in the
   temporarily occupied territories, he said, adding that hundreds of
   orphans were given for adoption to Russian families. The resolution
   just adopted notes that the temporary occupation of Crimea became a
   blueprint for a grave human rights crisis in other territories of
   Ukraine, he pointed out.

   The representative of China opposed provoking countries and the
   practice of pressuring them under the pretext of human rights.
   Rejecting establishment of country-specific mechanisms without the
   concerned country's consent, she said her delegation voted against the
   three drafts that were voted on. Concerning the drafts on the
   Democratic People's Republic of Korea and Myanmar, China will not join
   consensus, she said.

   The representative of Saint Kits and Nevis said resolutions under this
   item run counter to principles of double-standards and non-selectivity,
   suggesting that the Universal Periodic Review is the correct tool to
   review human rights issues in countries. Although the country abstained
   from the vote, Saint Kits and Nevis supports the substance of the
   draft, she said, calling on all countries to protect human rights.

   The representative of Cuba said he does not support politically
   motivated resolutions without consent from concerned countries.
   Dissociating from the resolution on the Democratic People's Republic of
   Korea, he added that such texts foster mistrust in general, but that
   this one takes the dangerous step of involving the Security Council,
   which oversteps this Committee's mandate. Cuba will not be complicit in
   attacks against the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and their
   rights to self-determination and development, he said. Adding that only
   international cooperation and adherence to principles of
   non-selectivity will allow the international community to progress on
   human rights, he said his delegation favours the Universal Periodic
   Review.

   The representative of Nicaragua reiterated rejection of the respective
   resolutions, based on politicized selectivity, lack of objectivity and
   absence of consent of the country concerned. He disassociated himself
   from the resolution on the human rights situation in the Democratic
   People's Republic of Korea, reiterating his commitment to promotion and
   protection of all human rights, opposing politicization of the matter.

   The representative of Belarus reiterated his country's consistent
   opposition of selective examination of country-specific human rights
   topics. Instrumentalization of human rights through country resolutions
   does not resolve human rights problems, but rather exacerbates
   confrontation between Member States, he stressed. Based on this
   approach, Belarus voted against all country resolutions and
   disassociated itself from consensus on the resolutions on situations in
   the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and Myanmar.

   The representative of Syria rejected politicization and selectivity in
   addressing human rights issues. She also opposed antagonization,
   confrontation and attempts to isolate countries -- in double standards
   -- aimed at covering crimes of other States and their violation of
   human rights. The fact that such resolutions are being adopted creates
   arenas for confrontation. She stressed that the adoption of
   country-specific resolutions politicizes promotion of human rights and
   constitutes a violation of the principles of objectivity and
   non-selectivity. She, thus, dissociated herself from consensus on the
   resolution relating to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and
   reaffirmed voting against the three that were voted on. She pointed out
   that Syria will acknowledge and accept the mandate emanating from such
   resolutions when there will be 193 similar resolutions. "What applies
   to others, will apply to us. What applies to us, must also apply to
   others," she stressed.

   The representative of Venezuela reiterated his country's rejection of
   any report or resolution against a specific country without that
   Government's consent, since they are expressions of politicization and
   selectivity. Since these mechanisms do not enter into a dialogue with
   all parties and are often submitted to third and even fourth parties,
   they lack objectivity, impartiality, transparency, non-selectivity,
   non-politicization, non-confrontation and equality and mutual respect
   for national sovereignty. He then disassociated from the resolution on
   the human rights situation in the Democratic People's Republic of
   Korea.

   The Assembly then turned to its report, "Promotion and protection of
   human rights: comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the
   Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action", which contains no draft
   proposals. The Assembly took note of the report.

   The Assembly then took up the report, Crime Prevention and Criminal
   Justice, which contains seven resolutions, all adopted without a vote.

   It adopted draft resolution I on "Follow-up to the fourteenth United
   Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice and
   preparations for the fifteenth United Nations Congress on Crime
   Prevention and Criminal Justice", whichcontains programme budget
   implications. By its terms, the Assembly requested the Commission on
   Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice to continue implementing the
   appropriate policy for follow-up to the Kyoto Declaration and decided
   to hold the fifteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and
   Criminal Justice in 2026. The Assembly further requested the Commission
   on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice to approve at its
   thirty-second session the overall theme and agenda items for the
   workshops of the fifteenth Congress.

   Adopting draft resolution II, "Reducing reoffending through
   rehabilitation and reintegration", the Assembly requested the United
   Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) to convene a meeting of an
   open-ended intergovernmental expert group to develop model strategies
   on reducing reoffending that can serve as useful tools for Member
   States. It requested UNODC to support efforts of Member States to
   reduce reoffending through promotion of rehabilitative environments by
   providing technical assistance to Member States, in particular
   developing countries.

   Next, the Assembly adopted draft resolution III on "Strengthening
   national and international efforts, including with the private sector,
   to protect children from sexual exploitation and abuse". It noted with
   concern the growing threat posed by "self-generated" child sexual abuse
   materials, where children are coerced into producing such materials, as
   well as linkages between child sexual exploitation and trafficking in
   children for commercial sexual exploitation. It further urged Member
   States to criminalize all forms of child sexual exploitation and abuse,
   including online, grant law enforcement agencies authority and provide
   tools to identify victims and bring perpetrators to justice.

   Adopting draft resolution IV on "United Nations African Institute for
   the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders", the Assembly
   urged the Institute's member States to pay all or part of their
   outstanding arrears. It further urged Member States, non-governmental
   organizations and the international community to continue to adopt
   measures to support the Institute in developing requisite capacity and
   implementing its activities aimed at strengthening criminal justice
   systems in Africa.

   The Assembly then took up draft resolution V on "Preventing and
   combating corrupt practices and the transfer of proceeds of corruption,
   facilitating asset recovery and returning such assets to legitimate
   owners, in particular to countries of origin, in accordance with the
   United Nations Convention against Corruption". By the text, the
   Assembly expressed concern that corruption threatens the stability of
   societies and that the impact of widespread corruption
   disproportionately affects the most disadvantaged. It stressed that
   preventive measures are the most effective means of avoiding corruption
   and, calling on States parties to the Convention to fulfil their
   commitments, such as criminalizing the bribing of foreign public
   officials and preventing the acquisition, transfer and laundering of
   proceeds of corruption.

   Also by the text, the Assembly urged States parties to designate a
   central authority for international cooperation and remove barriers to
   asset recovery. It also urged States to develop effective
   anti-corruption policies promoting society's participation and called
   on the private sector to remain engaged in the fight against
   corruption. The Assembly requested the Secretary-General to continue
   providing UNODC resources to promote implementation of the Convention
   and fund the accompanying review mechanism.

   Next, the Assembly adopted draft resolution VI on "Strengthening and
   promoting effective measures and international cooperation on organ
   donation and transplantation to prevent and combat trafficking in
   persons for the purpose of organ removal and trafficking in human
   organs". It thereby urged States to strengthen legislative frameworks
   to combat trafficking in persons for the purpose of organ removal and
   trafficking in human organs, including the criminalization of these
   practices to ensure accountability. It also urged them to guarantee
   that donation of organs is guided by clinical criteria and ethical
   norms and that the removal and transplantation of human organs take
   place in specifically authorized centres. It further urged the
   development of regulatory oversight of medical facilities and
   professionals and of registries regarding each organ recovery and
   transplantation procedure and outcomes for living donors and
   recipients, as well as identification systems.

   The Assembly then adopted draft resolution VII on "Strengthening the
   United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme, in
   particular its technical cooperation capacity",urging States to develop
   strategies to effectively address transnational organized crime and
   strengthen cooperation in accordance with the United Nations Convention
   against Corruption for asset recovery, with the cooperation of the
   UNODC. It also called on States to strengthen cooperation to counter
   foreign terrorist fighters, and address radicalization to terrorism in
   prisons.

   Also by the text, the Assembly urged States parties to make use of the
   United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime for
   cooperation in combating trafficking of cultural property, especially
   in returning such confiscated proceeds to their legitimate owners. It
   also urged States to introduce national and international measures to
   combat illicit trafficking of cultural property and take steps at the
   national level to eradicate the illegal trade of wildlife.

   The Assembly then turned to its report "Countering the use of
   information and communications technologies for criminal purposes",
   which contains no draft proposals. The Assembly took note of the
   report.

   The Assembly then turned to the report "International drug control",
   which contains one draft resolution.

   It adopted the draft on "Addressing the world drug problem through a
   comprehensive and balanced approach" by a recorded vote of 124 in
   favour to 9 against (Belarus, Cameroon, Iran, Nicaragua, Niger,
   Pakistan, Russian Federation, Syria and Türkiye), with 45 abstentions.
   By its terms, the Assembly condemned discriminatory or violent
   practices by law enforcement officials against marginalized persons,
   including systemic racism in law enforcement and criminal justice
   systems. It also expressed deep concern that drug traffickers are
   heavily armed with firearms obtained through trafficking, and expressed
   concern that illicit cultivation of drug crops can cause serious harm
   to the environment, deforestation and groundwater contamination.
   Further, the Assembly urged Member States and other donors to continue
   to fund the global drug problem response to address the growing
   HIV/AIDS epidemic among people who inject drugs, and in prisons.

   Speaking in explanation of vote, the representative of the Russian
   Federation noted that the old text of the consensus omnibus resolution
   of 2021 was supported by all, as it reflected the outcome of many years
   of negotiations to harmonize positions of delegations in New York. He
   thanked those who voted against or abstained, adding that the
   resolution is imbalanced and unacceptable.

   The Assembly next took up the report on "Revitalization of the Work of
   the General Assembly", which contains one draft resolution.

   It adopted the draft resolution on "Draft programme of work of the
   Third Committee for the seventy-eighth session of the General Assembly"
   without a vote.

   The Assembly then turned to its report "Programme planning", which
   contains no draft proposals. The Assembly took note of the report.

   For information media. Not an official record.

Report details

   Primary country

          + [35]World

   Other countries

          + [36]Syrian Arab Republic
          + [37]Ukraine

   Source

          + [38]UN General Assembly

   Format

          + [39]News and Press Release

   Theme

          + [40]Protection and Human Rights

   Language

          + [41]English

Share

     * [42]Share this on Facebook
     * [43]Share this on Twitter
     * [44]Post this on LinkedIn

Related Content

   [45]Ukraine

[46]UNICEF Ukraine Humanitarian Situation Report No. 24: 24 February - 31
December 2022

   Format
          Situation Report

   Source

          + [47]UNICEF

   Posted
          7 Jan 2023

   Originally published
          31 Dec 2022

   [48]World

[49]What is the Right to a Healthy Environment?

   Format
          Analysis

   Sources

          + [50]OHCHR
          + [51]UNDP
          + [52]UNEP

   Posted
          7 Jan 2023

   Originally published
          5 Jan 2023

   [53]Syria

[54]Collaborative Dispute Resolution: An Effective Out-of-Court Remedy in
Syria

   Format
          Evaluation and Lessons Learned

   Source

          + [55]UNDP

   Posted
          7 Jan 2023

   Originally published
          23 Dec 2022

   [56]World

[57]Cost-of-living Crisis Update: Diverging Food and Energy Prices, Diverging
Policy Responses

   Format
          Analysis

   Source

          + [58]UNDP

   Posted
          7 Jan 2023

   Originally published
          21 Dec 2022

Subscribe

   Get updates via Email ____________________ Subscribe
   Do not fill in this field ____________________

Footer

     * [59]Blog
     * [60]Labs
     * [61]About Us
     * [62]Terms
     * [63]Contact

   [64]Facebook [65]Twitter [66]LinkedIn [67]Instagram [68]Telegram
   Service provided by UNOCHA OCHA coordinates the global emergency
   response to save lives and protect people in humanitarian crises. We
   advocate for effective and principled humanitarian action by all, for
   all.

   [69]ReliefWeb's Terms & Conditions.

   © 2023 all rights reserved.

OCHA Services

   Related Platforms
     * [70]Reliefweb Response
     * [71]Humanitarian Data Exchange
     * [72]Humanitarian InSight
     * [73]Central Emergency Response Fund

   Other OCHA Services
     * [74]Financial Tracking Service
     * [75]Humanitarian Data Exchange
     * [76]Humanitarian ID
     * [77]Humanitarian Response


     * [78]Inter-Agency Standing Committee
     * [79]OCHA website
     * [80]ReliefWeb
     * [81]Virtual OSOCC

   [82]See all

References

   1. https://reliefweb.int/report/world/general-assembly-adopts-51-third-committee-drafts-combating-glorification-nazism-refugees-displaced-persons-protecting-children-sexual-exploitation
   2. https://reliefweb.int/report/world/general-assembly-adopts-51-third-committee-drafts-combating-glorification-nazism-refugees-displaced-persons-protecting-children-sexual-exploitation#main-content
   3. https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-TLKXSWT
   4. https://reliefweb.int/help
   5. https://reliefweb.int/user/login
   6. https://reliefweb.int/
   7. https://reliefweb.int/updates
   8. https://reliefweb.int/countries
   9. https://reliefweb.int/disasters
  10. https://reliefweb.int/organizations
  11. https://reliefweb.int/topics
  12. https://reliefweb.int/jobs
  13. https://reliefweb.int/training
  14. https://reliefweb.int/country/wld
  15. https://reliefweb.int/organization/un-ga
  16. https://press.un.org/en/2022/ga12483.doc.htm
  17. https://undocs.org/A/77/455
  18. https://undocs.org/A/77/456
  19. https://undocs.org/A/77/457
  20. https://undocs.org/A/77/458
  21. https://undocs.org/A/77/459
  22. https://undocs.org/A/77/460
  23. https://undocs.org/A/77/461
  24. https://undocs.org/A/77/462
  25. https://undocs.org/A/77/463
  26. https://undocs.org/A/77/463/Add.1
  27. https://undocs.org/A/77/463/Add.2
  28. https://undocs.org/A/77/463/Add.3
  29. https://undocs.org/A/77/463/Add.4
  30. https://undocs.org/A/77/464
  31. https://undocs.org/A/77/465
  32. https://undocs.org/A/77/466
  33. https://undocs.org/A/77/467
  34. https://undocs.org/A/77/468
  35. https://reliefweb.int/country/wld
  36. https://reliefweb.int/country/syr
  37. https://reliefweb.int/country/ukr
  38. https://reliefweb.int/organization/un-ga
  39. https://reliefweb.int/updates?advanced-search=%28F8%29
  40. https://reliefweb.int/updates?advanced-search=%28T4600%29
  41. https://reliefweb.int/updates?advanced-search=%28L267%29
  42. https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=https%3A//reliefweb.int/report/world/general-assembly-adopts-51-third-committee-drafts-combating-glorification-nazism-refugees-displaced-persons-protecting-children-sexual-exploitation%3Futm_medium%3Dsocial%26utm_campaign%3Dshared%26utm_source%3Dfacebook.com&t=General%20Assembly%20Adopts%2051%20Third%20Committee%20Drafts%20on%20Combating%20Glorification%20of%20Nazism%2C%20Refugees%2C%20Displaced%20Persons%2C%20Protecting%20Children%20from%20Sexual%20Exploitation
  43. https://twitter.com/share?url=https%3A//reliefweb.int/report/world/general-assembly-adopts-51-third-committee-drafts-combating-glorification-nazism-refugees-displaced-persons-protecting-children-sexual-exploitation%3Futm_medium%3Dsocial%26utm_campaign%3Dshared%26utm_source%3Dtwitter.com&text=General%20Assembly%20Adopts%2051%20Third%20Committee%20Drafts%20on%20Combating%20Glorification%20of%20Nazism%2C%20R%E2%80%A6&via=reliefweb
  44. https://www.linkedin.com/shareArticle?mini=true&url=https%3A//reliefweb.int/report/world/general-assembly-adopts-51-third-committee-drafts-combating-glorification-nazism-refugees-displaced-persons-protecting-children-sexual-exploitation%3Futm_medium%3Dsocial%26utm_campaign%3Dshared%26utm_source%3Dlinkedin.com&title=General%20Assembly%20Adopts%2051%20Third%20Committee%20Drafts%20on%20Combating%20Glorification%20of%20Nazism%2C%20Refugees%2C%20Displaced%20Persons%2C%20Protecting%20Children%20from%20Sexual%20Exploitation&summary=SEVENTY-SEVENTH%20SESSION%2C%2054TH%20MEETING%20%28PM%29%20GA/12483%20Delegates%20Reject%20Country-Specific%20Texts%20as%20Political%20Tools%20to%20Interfere%20in%20Nations%E2%80%99%20Internal%20Affairs%20The%20General%20Assembly%20adopted%2051%20resolutions...&source=ReliefWeb
  45. https://reliefweb.int/country/ukr
  46. https://reliefweb.int/report/ukraine/unicef-ukraine-humanitarian-situation-report-no-24-24-february-31-december-2022
  47. https://reliefweb.int/organization/unicef
  48. https://reliefweb.int/country/wld
  49. https://reliefweb.int/report/world/what-right-healthy-environment
  50. https://reliefweb.int/organization/ohchr
  51. https://reliefweb.int/organization/undp
  52. https://reliefweb.int/organization/unep
  53. https://reliefweb.int/country/syr
  54. https://reliefweb.int/report/syrian-arab-republic/collaborative-dispute-resolution-effective-out-court-remedy-syria
  55. https://reliefweb.int/organization/undp
  56. https://reliefweb.int/country/wld
  57. https://reliefweb.int/report/world/cost-living-crisis-update-diverging-food-and-energy-prices-diverging-policy-responses
  58. https://reliefweb.int/organization/undp
  59. https://reliefweb.int/blog
  60. https://labs.reliefweb.int/
  61. https://reliefweb.int/about
  62. https://reliefweb.int/terms-conditions
  63. https://reliefweb.int/contact
  64. https://www.facebook.com/reliefweb
  65. https://twitter.com/reliefweb
  66. https://www.linkedin.com/company/reliefweb
  67. https://www.instagram.com/reliefweb1996/
  68. https://t.me/+8QT4PI32MbY3MDdh
  69. https://reliefweb.int/terms-conditions
  70. https://response.reliefweb.int/
  71. https://data.humdata.org/
  72. https://hum-insight.info/
  73. https://cerf.un.org/
  74. https://fts.unocha.org/
  75. https://data.humdata.org/
  76. https://auth.humanitarian.id/
  77. https://humanitarianresponse.info/
  78. https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/
  79. https://unocha.org/
  80. https://reliefweb.int/
  81. https://vosocc.unocha.org/
  82. https://www.unocha.org/ocha-digital-services
