   #[1]THE AMERICAN YAWP » Feed [2]THE AMERICAN YAWP » Comments Feed
   [3]14. The Civil War [4]16. Capital and Labor [5]alternate [6]alternate

[7]THE AMERICAN YAWP

Menu

   [8]Skip to content
     * [9]Home
     * [10]About
     * [11]Barbara Jordan - On the Impeachment of Richard Nixon (1974)
     * [12]Brookes print
     * [13]Casta painting
     * [14]Contributors
     * [15]How the Other Half Lived: Photographs of Jacob Riis
     * [16]Introduction
     * [17]Note on Recommended Readings
     * [18]Press
     * [19]Sample Feedback (@AmericanYawp)
     * [20]Teaching Materials
     * [21]Updates

15. Reconstruction

   [22]This photograph shows twenty three men, women, and children sitting
   together in a contraband camp.

   "Contrabands," Cumberland Landing, Virginia, 1862. [23]Library of
   Congress.

        *The American Yawp is an evolving, collaborative text. Please
                  click [24]here to improve this chapter.*
     * [25]I. Introduction
     * [26]II. Politics of Reconstruction
     * [27]III. The Meaning of Black Freedom
     * [28]IV. Reconstruction and Women
     * [29]V. Racial Violence in Reconstruction
     * [30]VI. Economic Development during the Civil War and
       Reconstruction
     * [31]VII. The End of Reconstruction
     * [32]VIII. Conclusion
     * [33]IX. Primary Sources
     * [34]X. Reference Material

                               I. Introduction

   After the Civil War, much of the South lay in ruins. "It passes my
   comprehension to tell what became of our railroads," one South
   Carolinian told a northern reporter. "We had passably good roads, on
   which we could reach almost any part of the State, and the next week
   they were all gone--not simply broken up, but gone. Some of the
   material was burned, I know, but miles and miles of iron have actually
   disappeared, gone out of existence."^[35]1 He might as well have been
   talking about the entire antebellum way of life. The future of the
   South was uncertain. How would these states be brought back into the
   Union? Would they be conquered territories or equal states? How would
   they rebuild their governments, economies, and social systems? What
   rights did freedom confer on formerly enslaved people?

   The answers to many of Reconstruction's questions hinged on the
   concepts of citizenship and equality. The era witnessed perhaps the
   most open and widespread discussions of citizenship since the nation's
   founding. It was a moment of revolutionary possibility and violent
   backlash. African Americans and Radical Republicans pushed the nation
   to finally realize the Declaration of Independence's promises that "all
   men are created equal" and have "certain unalienable rights." White
   Democrats granted African Americans legal freedom but little more. When
   Black Americans and their radical allies succeeded in securing
   citizenship for freedpeople, a new fight commenced to determine the
   legal, political, and social implications of American citizenship.
   Resistance continued, and Reconstruction eventually collapsed. In the
   South, limits on human freedom endured and would stand for nearly a
   century more.


                       II. Politics of Reconstruction

   [36]This political cartoon Johnson stitching together the globe while
   Lincoln supports it with a rail. The caption reads "The Rail Splitter
   at work repairing the Union." Johnson says, "Take it quietly Uncle Abe
   and I will draw it closer than ever!" Lincoln says, "A few more
   stitches Andy and the good old Union will be mended!"

   With the war coming to an end, the question of how to reunite the
   former Confederate states with the Union was a divisive one. Lincoln's
   Presidential Reconstruction plans were seen by many, including Radical
   Republicans in Congress, to be too tolerant towards what they
   considered to be traitors. This political cartoon reflects this
   viewpoint, showing Lincoln and Johnson happily stitching the Union back
   together with little anger towards the South. Joseph E. Baker, The
   `Rail Splitter' at Work Repairing the Union, 1865. [37]Library of
   Congress.

   Reconstruction--the effort to restore southern states to the Union and
   to redefine African Americans' place in American society--began before
   the Civil War ended. President Abraham Lincoln began planning for the
   reunification of the United States in the fall of 1863.^[38]2 With a
   sense that Union victory was imminent and that he could turn the tide
   of the war by stoking Unionist support in the Confederate states,
   Lincoln issued a proclamation allowing southerners to take an oath of
   allegiance. When just 10 percent of a state's voting population had
   taken such an oath, loyal Unionists could then establish
   governments.^[39]3 These so-called Lincoln governments sprang up in
   pockets where Union support existed like Louisiana, Tennessee, and
   Arkansas. Unsurprisingly, these were also the places that were exempted
   from the liberating effects of the Emancipation Proclamation.

   Initially proposed as a war aim, Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation
   committed the United States to the abolition of slavery. However, the
   proclamation freed only enslaved people in areas of rebellion and left
   more than seven hundred thousand in bondage in Delaware, Kentucky,
   Maryland, and Missouri as well as in Union-occupied areas of Louisiana,
   Tennessee, and Virginia.

   To cement the abolition of slavery, Congress passed the Thirteenth
   Amendment on January 31, 1865. The amendment legally abolished slavery
   "except as a punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been
   duly convicted." Section Two of the amendment granted Congress the
   "power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation." State
   ratification followed, and by the end of the year the requisite three
   fourths of the states had approved the amendment, and four million
   people were forever free from the slavery that had existed in North
   America for 250 years.^[40]4

   Lincoln's policy was lenient, conservative, and short-lived.
   Reconstruction changed when John Wilkes Booth shot Lincoln on April 14,
   1865, during a performance of Our American Cousin at Ford's Theater.
   Treated rapidly and with all possible care, Lincoln nevertheless
   succumbed to his wounds the following morning, leaving a somber pall
   over the North and especially among African Americans.

   The assassination of Abraham Lincoln propelled Vice President Andrew
   Johnson into the executive office in April 1865. Johnson, a
   states'-rights, strict-constructionist, and unapologetic racist from
   Tennessee, offered southern states a quick restoration into the Union.
   His Reconstruction plan required provisional southern governments to
   void their ordinances of secession, repudiate their Confederate debts,
   and ratify the Thirteenth Amendment. On all other matters, the
   conventions could do what they wanted with no federal interference. He
   pardoned all southerners engaged in the rebellion with the exception of
   wealthy planters who possessed more than $20,000 in property.^[41]5 The
   southern aristocracy would have to appeal to Johnson for individual
   pardons. In the meantime, Johnson hoped that a new class of southerners
   would replace the extremely wealthy in leadership positions
   .

   Many southern governments enacted legislation that reestablished
   antebellum power relationships. South Carolina and Mississippi passed
   laws known as Black Codes to regulate Black behavior and impose social
   and economic control. Other states soon followed. These laws granted
   some rights to African Americans, like the right to own property, to
   marry, or to make contracts. But they also denied fundamental rights.
   White lawmakers forbade Black men from serving on juries or in state
   militias, refused to recognize Black testimony against white people,
   apprenticed orphaned children to their former enslaver, and established
   severe vagrancy laws. Mississippi's vagrant law required all freedmen
   to carry papers proving they had means of employment.^[42]6 If they had
   no proof, they could be arrested and fined. If they could not pay the
   fine, the sheriff had the right to hire out his prisoner to anyone who
   was willing to pay the tax. Similar ambiguous vagrancy laws throughout
   the South reasserted control over Black labor in what one scholar has
   called "slavery by another name."^[43]7 Black Codes effectively
   criminalized Black people's leisure, limited their mobility, and locked
   many into exploitative farming contracts. Attempts to restore the
   antebellum economic order largely succeeded.

   These laws and outrageous mob violence against Black southerners led
   Republicans to call for a more dramatic Reconstruction. So when Johnson
   announced that the southern states had been restored, congressional
   Republicans refused to seat delegates from the newly reconstructed
   states.

   Republicans in Congress responded with a spate of legislation aimed at
   protecting freedmen and restructuring political relations in the South.
   Many Republicans were keen to grant voting rights for freedmen in order
   to build a new powerful voting bloc. Some Republicans, like U.S.
   congressman Thaddeus Stevens, believed in racial equality, but the
   majority were motivated primarily by the interest of their political
   party. The only way to protect Republican interests in the South was to
   give the vote to the hundreds of thousands of Black men. Republicans in
   Congress responded to the codes with the Civil Rights Act of 1866, the
   first federal attempt to constitutionally define all American-born
   residents (except Native peoples) as citizens. The law also prohibited
   any curtailment of citizens' "fundamental rights."^[44]8
   [45]This elaborate print shows the erection of a dome emblazoned with
   the map of the nation. Dozens of floating heads depicting major
   political luminaries float above between two angels.

   While no one could agree on what the best plan for reconstructing the
   nation would be, Americans understood the moment as critical and
   perhaps revolutionary. In this magnificent visual metaphor for the
   reconciliation of the North and South, John Lawrence postulates what
   might result from reunion. Reconstruction, the print seems to argue,
   will form a more perfect Union that upholds the ideals of the American
   Revolution, most importantly (as seen on a streaming banner near the
   top) that "All men are born free and equal." John Giles Lawrence,
   Reconstruction, 1867. [46]Library of Congress.

   The Fourteenth Amendment developed concurrently with the Civil Rights
   Act to ensure its constitutionality. The House of Representatives
   approved the Fourteenth Amendment on June 13, 1866. Section One granted
   citizenship and repealed the Taney Court's infamous Dred Scott (1857)
   decision. Moreover, it ensured that state laws could not deny due
   process or discriminate against particular groups of people. The
   Fourteenth Amendment signaled the federal government's willingness to
   enforce the Bill of Rights over the authority of the states.

   Because he did not believe African Americans deserved equal rights,
   President Johnson opposed the passage of the Fourteenth Amendment and
   vetoed the Civil Rights Act. But after winning a two-thirds majority in
   the 1866 midterm elections, Republicans overrode the veto, and in 1867,
   they passed the first Reconstruction Act, dissolving state governments
   and dividing the South into five military districts. Under these new
   terms, states would have to ratify the Fourteenth Amendment, write new
   constitutions enfranchising African Americans, and abolish repressive
   "Black Codes" before rejoining the union. In the face of President
   Johnson's repeated obstructionism, the House of Representatives issued
   articles of impeachment against the president. Although Johnson
   narrowly escaped conviction in the Senate, Congress won the power to
   direct a new phase of Reconstruction. Six weeks later, on July 9, 1868,
   the states ratified the Fourteenth Amendment, guaranteeing birthright
   citizenship and "equal protection of the laws.

   In the 1868 presidential election, former Union General Ulysses S.
   Grant ran on a platform that proclaimed, "Let Us Have Peace," in which
   he promised to protect the new status quo. On the other hand, the
   Democratic candidate, Horatio Seymour, promised to repeal
   Reconstruction. Black southern voters helped Grant win most of the
   former Confederacy. Scalawags and Carpetbaggers also buttressed
   Republicans in the South. Scalawag was the derisive term used to
   describe white Republicans in the South and carpetbaggers was the term
   for northerners who traveled to the South during Reconstruction. But
   Black voters formed the backbone of the Republican coalition in the
   South.
   [47]With the passage of the Fifteenth Amendment, droves of African
   American men went to the polls to exercise their newly recognized right
   to vote. In this Harper's Weekly print, black men of various
   occupations wait patiently for their turn as the first voter submits
   his ballot. Unlike other contemporary images that depicted African
   Americans as ignorant, unkempt, and lazy, this print shows these black
   men as active citizens. Alfred R. Waud, "The First Vote," November
   1867. Library of Congress.

   In this Harper's Weekly print, Black men of various occupations wait
   patiently for their turn as the first voter submits his ballot. Unlike
   other contemporary images that depicted African Americans as ignorant,
   unkempt, and lazy, this print shows these Black men as active citizens.
   Three years after the publication of this print, the Fifteenth
   Amendment protected the right of Black Americans to vote. Alfred R.
   Waud, The First Vote, November 1867. [48]Library of Congress.

   Reconstruction brought the first moment of mass democratic
   participation for African Americans. In 1860, only five states in the
   North allowed African Americans to vote on equal terms with whites. Yet
   after 1867, when Congress ordered southern states to eliminate racial
   discrimination in voting, African Americans began to win elections
   across the South. In a short time, the South was transformed from an
   all-white, pro-slavery, Democratic stronghold to a collection of
   Republican-led states with African Americans in positions of power for
   the first time in American history.^[49]9

   Through the provisions of the congressional Reconstruction Acts, Black
   men voted in large numbers and also served as delegates to the state
   constitutional conventions in 1868. Black delegates actively
   participated in revising state constitutions. One of the most
   significant accomplishments of these conventions was the establishment
   of a public school system. While public schools were virtually
   nonexistent in the antebellum period, by the end of Reconstruction,
   every southern state had established a public school system.^[50]10
   Republican officials opened state institutions like mental asylums,
   hospitals, orphanages, and prisons to white and Black residents, though
   often on a segregated basis. They actively sought industrial
   development, northern investment, and internal improvements.

   African Americans served at every level of government during
   Reconstruction. At the federal level, Hiram Revels and Blanche K. Bruce
   were chosen as U.S. senators from Mississippi. Fourteen men served in
   the House of Representatives. At least 270 other African American men
   served in patronage positions as postmasters, customs officials,
   assessors, and ambassadors. At the state level, more than 1,000 African
   American men held offices in the South. P. B. S. Pinchback served as
   Louisiana's governor for thirty-four days after the previous governor
   was suspended during impeachment proceedings and was the only African
   American state governor until Virginia elected L. Douglas Wilder in
   1989. Almost 800 African American men served as state legislators
   around the South, with African Americans at one time making up a
   majority in the South Carolina House of Representatives.^[51]11
   [52]The era of Reconstruction witnessed a few moments of true progress.
   One of those was the election of African Americans to local, state, and
   national offices, including both houses of Congress. Pictured here are
   Hiram Revels (the first African American Senator) alongside six black
   representatives, all from the former Confederate states. Currier &
   Ives, "First Colored Senator and Representatives in the 41st and 42nd
   Congress of the United States," 1872. Library of Congress,
   LC-DIG-ppmsca-17564.

   The era of Reconstruction witnessed a few moments of true progress. One
   of those was the election of African Americans to local, state, and
   national offices, including both houses of Congress. Pictured here are
   Hiram Revels (the first African American Senator) alongside six Black
   representatives, all from the former Confederate states. Currier &
   Ives, First Colored Senator and Representatives in the 41st and 42nd
   Congress of the United States, 1872. [53]Library of Congress.

   African American officeholders came from diverse backgrounds. Many had
   been born free or had gained their freedom before the Civil War. Many
   free African Americans, particularly those in South Carolina, Virginia,
   and Louisiana, were wealthy and well educated, two facts that
   distinguished them from much of the white population both before and
   after the Civil War. Some, like Antoine Dubuclet of Louisiana and
   William Breedlove from Virginia, owned enslaved laborers before the
   Civil War. Others had helped enslaved people escape or taught them to
   read, like Georgia's James D. Porter.

   Most African American officeholders, however, gained their freedom
   during the war. Among them were skilled craftsmen like Emanuel Fortune,
   a shoemaker from Florida; ministers such as James D. Lynch from
   Mississippi; and teachers like William V. Turner from Alabama. Moving
   into political office was a natural continuation of the leadership
   roles they had held in their former communities.

   By the end of Reconstruction in 1877, more than two thousand African
   American men had served in offices ranging from local levee
   commissioner to U.S. senator.^[54]12 When the end of Reconstruction
   returned white Democrats to power in the South, all but a few African
   American officeholders lost their positions. After Reconstruction,
   African Americans did not enter the political arena again in large
   numbers until well into the twentieth century.


                      III. The Meaning of Black Freedom

   Land was one of the major desires of the freed people. Frustrated by
   responsibility for the growing numbers of freed people following his
   troops, General William T. Sherman issued Special Field Order No. 15,
   in which land in Georgia and South Carolina was to be set aside as a
   homestead for the freedpeople. Sherman lacked the authority to
   confiscate and distribute land, so this plan never fully took
   effect.^[55]13 One of the main purposes of the Freedmen's Bureau,
   however, was to redistribute lands to formerly enslaved people that had
   been abandoned and confiscated by the federal government. Even these
   land grants were short-lived. In 1866, land that ex-Confederates had
   left behind was reinstated to them.

   Freedpeople's hopes of land reform were unceremoniously dashed as
   Freedmen's Bureau agents held meetings with the freedmen throughout the
   South, telling them the promise of land was not going to be honored and
   that instead they should plan to go back to work for their former
   enslaver as wage laborers. The policy reversal came as quite a shock.
   In one instance, Freedmen's Bureau commissioner General Oliver O.
   Howard went to Edisto Island to inform the Black population there of
   the policy change. The Black commission's response was that "we were
   promised Homesteads by the government. . . . You ask us to forgive the
   land owners of our island. . . .The man who tied me to a tree and gave
   me 39 lashes and who stripped and flogged my mother and my sister . . .
   that man I cannot well forgive. Does it look as if he has forgiven me,
   seeing how he tries to keep me in a condition of helplessness?"^[56]14

   In working to ensure that crops would be harvested, agents sometimes
   coerced formerly enslaved people into signing contracts with their
   former enslavers. However, the bureau also instituted courts where
   African Americans could seek redress if their employers were abusing
   them or not paying them. The last ember of hope for land redistribution
   was extinguished when Thaddeus Stevens and Charles Sumner's proposed
   land reform bills were tabled in Congress. Radicalism had its limits,
   and the Republican Party's commitment to economic stability eclipsed
   their interest in racial justice.

   Another aspect of the pursuit of freedom was the reconstitution of
   families. Many freedpeople immediately left plantations in search of
   family members who had been sold away. Newspaper ads sought information
   about long-lost relatives. People placed these ads until the turn of
   the twentieth century, demonstrating the enduring pursuit of family
   reunification. Freedpeople sought to gain control over their own
   children or other children who had been apprenticed to white masters
   either during the war or as a result of the Black Codes. Above all,
   freedpeople wanted freedom to control their families.^[57]15

   Many freedpeople rushed to solemnize unions with formal wedding
   ceremonies. Black people's desires to marry fit the government's goal
   to make free Black men responsible for their own households and to
   prevent Black women and children from becoming dependent on the
   government.

   Freedpeople placed a great emphasis on education for their children and
   themselves. For many, the ability to finally read the Bible for
   themselves induced work-weary men and women to spend all evening or
   Sunday attending night school or Sunday school classes. It was not
   uncommon to find a one-room school with more than fifty students
   ranging in age from three to eighty. As Booker T. Washington famously
   described the situation, "it was a whole race trying to go to school.
   Few were too young, and none too old, to make the attempt to
   learn."^[58]16

   Many churches served as schoolhouses and as a result became central to
   the freedom struggle. Free and freed Black southerners carried
   well-formed political and organizational skills into freedom. They
   developed anti-racist politics and organizational skills through
   antislavery organizations turned church associations. Liberated from
   white-controlled churches, Black Americans remade their religious
   worlds according to their own social and spiritual desires.^[59]17

   One of the more marked transformations that took place after
   emancipation was the proliferation of independent Black churches and
   church associations. In the 1930s, nearly 40 percent of 663 Black
   churches surveyed had their organizational roots in the
   post-emancipation era.^[60]18 Many independent Black churches emerged
   in the rural areas, and most of them had never been affiliated with
   white churches.

   Many of these independent churches were quickly organized into
   regional, state, and even national associations, often by brigades of
   free Black northerners and midwesterners who went to the South to help
   the freedmen. Through associations like the Virginia Baptist State
   Convention and the Consolidated American Baptist Missionary Convention,
   Baptists became the fastest growing post-emancipation denomination,
   building on their antislavery associational roots and carrying on the
   struggle for Black political participation.^[61]19

   Tensions between northerners and southerners over styles of worship and
   educational requirements strained these associations. Southern, rural
   Black churches preferred worship services with more emphasis on
   inspired preaching, while Black urban northerners favored more orderly
   worship and an educated ministry.

   Perhaps the most significant internal transformation in churches had to
   do with the role of women--a situation that eventually would lead to
   the development of independent women's conventions in Baptist,
   Methodist, and Pentecostal churches. Women like Nannie Helen Burroughs
   and Virginia Broughton, leaders of the Baptist Woman's Convention,
   worked to protect Black women from sexual violence from white men.
   Black representatives repeatedly articulated this concern in state
   constitutional conventions early in the Reconstruction era. In
   churches, women continued to fight for equal treatment and access to
   the pulpit as preachers, even though they were able to vote in church
   meetings.^[62]20

   Black churches provided centralized leadership and organization in
   post-emancipation communities. Many political leaders and officeholders
   were ministers. Churches were often the largest building in town and
   served as community centers. Access to pulpits and growing
   congregations provided a foundation for ministers' political
   leadership. Groups like the Union League, militias, and fraternal
   organizations all used the regalia, ritual, and even hymns of churches
   to inform and shape their practice.

   Black churches provided space for conflict over gender roles, cultural
   values, practices, norms, and political engagement. With the rise of
   Jim Crow, Black churches would enter a new phase of negotiating
   relationships within the community and the wider world.


                        IV. Reconstruction and Women

   [63]Photograph of Susan B. Anthony and Elizabeth Cady Stanton.

   Susan B. Anthony and Elizabeth Cady Stanton maintained a strong and
   productive relationship for nearly half a century as they sought to
   secure political rights for women. While the fight for women's rights
   stalled during the war, it sprung back to life as Anthony, Stanton, and
   others formed the American Equal Rights Association. [Elizabeth Cady
   Stanton, seated, and Susan B. Anthony, standing, three-quarter length
   portrait], between 1880 and 1902. [64]Library of Congress.
   Reconstruction involved more than the meaning of emancipation. Women
   also sought to redefine their roles within the nation and in their
   local communities. The abolitionist and women's rights movements
   simultaneously converged and began to clash. In the South, both Black
   and white women struggled to make sense of a world of death and change.
   In Reconstruction, leading women's rights advocate Elizabeth Cady
   Stanton saw an unprecedented opportunity for disenfranchised groups.
   Women as well as Black Americans, North and South, could seize
   political rights. Stanton formed the Women's Loyal National League in
   1863, which petitioned Congress for a constitutional amendment
   abolishing slavery.^[65]21 The Thirteenth Amendment marked a victory
   not only for the antislavery cause but also for the Loyal League,
   proving women's political efficacy and the possibility for radical
   change. Now, as Congress debated the meanings of freedom, equality, and
   citizenship for formerly enslaved people, women's rights leaders saw an
   opening to advance transformations in women's status, too. On May 10,
   1866, just one year after the war, the Eleventh National Women's Rights
   Convention met in New York City to discuss what many agreed was an
   extraordinary moment, full of promise for fundamental social change.
   Elizabeth Cady Stanton presided over the meeting. Also in attendance
   were prominent abolitionists with whom Stanton and other women's rights
   leaders had joined forces in the years leading up to the war.
   Addressing this crowd of social reformers, Stanton captured the radical
   spirit of the hour: "now in the reconstruction," she declared, "is the
   opportunity, perhaps for the century, to base our government on the
   broad principle of equal rights for all."^[66]22 Stanton chose her
   universal language--"equal rights for all"--with intention, setting an
   agenda of universal suffrage. Thus, in 1866, the National Women's
   Rights Convention officially merged with the American Anti-Slavery
   Society to form the American Equal Rights Association (AERA). This
   union marked the culmination of the long-standing partnership between
   abolitionists and women's rights advocates.

   The AERA was split over whether Black male suffrage should take
   precedence over universal suffrage, given the political climate of the
   South. Some worried that political support for freedmen would be
   undermined by the pursuit of women's suffrage. For example, AERA member
   Frederick Douglass insisted that the ballot was literally a "question
   of life and death" for southern Black men, but not for women.^[67]23
   Some African American women challenged white suffragists in other ways.
   Frances Harper, for example, a freeborn Black woman living in Ohio,
   urged them to consider their own privilege as white and middle class.
   Universal suffrage, she argued, would not so clearly address the
   complex difficulties posed by racial, economic, and gender
   inequality.^[68]24
   [69]Elizabeth Cady Stanton, the great women's rights and abolition
   activist, was one of the strongest forces in the universal suffrage
   movement. Her name can be seen at the top of this petition to extend
   suffrage to all regardless of sex, which was present to Congress on
   January 29, 1866. It did not pass, and women would not gain the vote
   for more than half a decade after Stanton and others signed this
   petition. "Petition of E. Cady Stanton, Susan B. Anthony, Lucy Stone,
   Antoinette Brown Blackwell, and Others Asking for an Amendment of the
   Constitution that Shall Prohibit the Several States from Disfranchising
   Any of Their Citizens on the Ground of Sex," 1865. National Archives
   and Records Administration,
   http://research.archives.gov/description/306684.

   Elizabeth Cady Stanton, the great women's rights and abolition
   activist, was one of the strongest forces in the universal suffrage
   movement. Her name can be seen at the top of this petition to extend
   suffrage to all regardless of sex, which was present to Congress on
   January 29, 1866. It did not pass, and women would not gain the vote
   for more than half a century after Stanton and others signed this
   petition. Petition of E. Cady Stanton, Susan B. Anthony, Lucy Stone,
   Antoinette Brown Blackwell, and Others Asking for an Amendment of the
   Constitution that Shall Prohibit the Several States from Disfranchising
   Any of Their Citizens on the Ground of Sex, 1865. [70]National Archives
   and Records Administration.

   These divisions came to a head early in 1867, as the AERA organized a
   campaign in Kansas to determine the fate of Black and woman suffrage.
   Elizabeth Cady Stanton and her partner in the movement, Susan B.
   Anthony, made the journey to advocate universal suffrage. Yet they soon
   realized that their allies were distancing themselves from women's
   suffrage in order to advance Black enfranchisement. Disheartened,
   Stanton and Anthony allied instead with white supremacists who
   supported women's equality. Many fellow activists were dismayed by
   Stanton's and Anthony's willingness to appeal to racism to advance
   their cause.^[71]25

   These tensions finally erupted over conflicting views of the Fourteenth
   and Fifteenth Amendments. Women's rights leaders vigorously protested
   the Fourteenth Amendment. Although it established national citizenship
   for all persons born or naturalized in the United States, the amendment
   also introduced the word male into the Constitution for the first time.
   After the Fifteenth Amendment ignored sex as an unlawful barrier to
   suffrage, an omission that appalled Stanton, the AERA officially
   dissolved. Stanton and Anthony formed the National Woman Suffrage
   Association (NWSA), while suffragists who supported the Fifteenth
   Amendment, regardless of its limitations, founded the American Woman
   Suffrage Association (AWSA).

   The NWSA soon rallied around a new strategy: the New Departure. This
   new approach interpreted the Constitution as already guaranteeing women
   the right to vote. They argued that by nationalizing citizenship for
   all people and protecting all rights of citizens--including the right
   to vote--the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments guaranteed women's
   suffrage. Broadcasting the New Departure, the NWSA encouraged women to
   register to vote, which roughly seven hundred did between 1868 and
   1872. Susan B. Anthony was one of them and was arrested but then
   acquitted in trial. In 1875, the Supreme Court addressed this
   constitutional argument: acknowledging women's citizenship but arguing
   that suffrage was not a right guaranteed to all citizens. This ruling
   not only defeated the New Departure but also coincided with the Court's
   broader reactionary interpretation of the Reconstruction amendments
   that significantly limited freedmen's rights. Following this defeat,
   many suffragists like Stanton increasingly replaced the ideal of
   universal suffrage with arguments about the virtue that white women
   would bring to the polls. These new arguments often hinged on racism
   and declared the necessity of white women voters to keep Black men in
   check.^[72]26

   Advocates for women's suffrage were largely confined to the North, but
   southern women were experiencing social transformations as well. The
   lines between refined white womanhood and degraded enslaved Black
   femaleness were no longer so clearly defined. Moreover, during the war,
   southern white women had been called on to do traditional men's work,
   chopping wood and managing businesses. While white southern women
   decided whether and how to return to their prior status, African
   American women embraced new freedoms and a redefinition of womanhood.
   [73]The Fifteenth Amendment gave male citizens, regardless of race,
   color, or previous status (i.e. slavery), the right to vote. While the
   amendment was not all encompassing in that women were not included, it
   was an extremely significant ruling in establishing the liberties of
   African American men. This print depicts a huge parade held in
   Baltimore, Maryland, on May 19, 1870, surrounded by portraits of
   abolitionists and scenes of African Americans exercising their rights.
   Thomas Kelly after James C. Beard, "The 15th Amendment. Celebrated May
   19th 1870," 1870. Library of Congress,
   http://www.loc.gov/exhibits/treasures/trr060.html.

   The Fifteenth Amendment prohibited discrimination in voting rights on
   the basis of race, color, or previous status (i.e. slavery). While the
   amendment was not all-encompassing in that women were not included, it
   was an extremely significant ruling in affirming the liberties of
   African American men. This print depicts a huge parade held in
   Baltimore, Maryland, on May 19, 1870, surrounded by portraits of
   abolitionists and scenes of African Americans exercising their rights.
   Thomas Kelly after James C. Beard, The 15th Amendment. Celebrated May
   19th 1870, 1870. [74]Library of Congress.

   The Civil War showed white women, especially upper-class women, life
   without their husbands' protection. Many did not like what they saw,
   especially given the possibility of racial equality. Formerly wealthy
   women hoped to maintain their social status by rebuilding the prewar
   social hierarchy. Through Ladies' Memorial Associations and other civic
   groups, southern women led the efforts to bury and memorialize the
   dead, praising and bolstering their men's masculinity through
   nationalist speeches and memorials. Ladies' Memorial Associations
   (LMAs) grew out of the Soldiers' Aid Society and became the precursor
   and custodian of the Lost Cause narrative. Proponents of the Lost Cause
   tried to rewrite the history of the antebellum South to deemphasize the
   brutality of slavery. They also created the myth that the Civil War was
   fought over states' rights instead of slavery, which was the actual
   cause. LMAs and their ceremonies created new holidays during which
   white southerners could reaffirm their allegiance to the Confederacy
   and express their opposition to Black rights. For instance, some LMAs
   celebrated the anniversary of Stonewall Jackson's death on May
   10.^[75]27 Through these activities, southern women took on political
   roles in the South.

   Southern Black women also sought to redefine their public and private
   lives. Their efforts to control their labor met the immediate
   opposition of southern white women. Gertrude Clanton, a plantation
   mistress before the war, disliked cooking and washing dishes, so she
   hired an African American woman to do the washing. A misunderstanding
   quickly developed. The laundress, nameless in Gertrude's records,
   performed her job and returned home. Gertrude believed that her money
   had purchased a day's labor, not just the load of washing, and she
   became quite frustrated. Meanwhile, this washerwoman and others like
   her set wages and hours for themselves, and in many cases began to take
   washing into their own homes in order to avoid the surveillance of
   white women and the sexual threat posed by white men.^[76]28

   Similar conflicts raged across the South. White southerners demanded
   that African American women work in the plantation home and instituted
   apprenticeship systems to place African American children in unpaid
   labor positions. African American women combated these attempts by
   refusing to work at jobs without fair pay or fair conditions and by
   clinging tightly to their children.

   Like white LMA members, African American women formed clubs to bury
   their dead, to celebrate African American masculinity, and to provide
   aid to their communities. On May 1, 1865, African Americans in
   Charleston created the precursor to the modern Memorial Day by mourning
   the Union dead buried hastily on a race track turned prison.^[77]29
   Like their white counterparts, the three hundred African American women
   who participated had been members of the local Patriotic Association,
   which aided freedpeople during the war. African American women
   continued participating in federal Decoration Day ceremonies and,
   later, formed their own club organizations. Racial violence, whether
   city riots or rural vigilantes, continued to threaten these vulnerable
   households. Nevertheless, the formation and preservation of African
   American households became a paramount goal for African American women.

   For all of their differences, white and Black southern women faced a
   similar challenge during Reconstruction. Southern women celebrated the
   return of their brothers, husbands, and sons, but couples separated for
   many years struggled to adjust. To make matters worse, many of these
   former soldiers returned with physical or mental wounds. For white
   families, suicide and divorce became more acceptable, while the
   opposite occurred for Black families. Since the entire South suffered
   from economic devastation, many families were impoverished and sank
   into debt. All southern women faced economic devastation, lasting
   wartime trauma, and enduring racial tensions.


                    V. Racial Violence in Reconstruction

   Violence shattered the dream of biracial democracy. Still steeped in
   the violence of slavery, white southerners could scarcely imagine Black
   free labor. Congressional investigator Carl Schurz reported that in the
   summer of 1865, southerners shared a near unanimous sentiment that "You
   cannot make the negro work, without physical compulsion."^[78]30
   Violence had been used in the antebellum period to enforce slave labor
   and to define racial difference. In the post-emancipation period it was
   used to stifle Black advancement and return to the old order.

   Much of life in the antebellum South had been premised on slavery. The
   social order rested on a subjugated underclass, and the labor system
   required unfree laborers. A notion of white supremacy and Black
   inferiority undergirded it all. White people were understood as fit for
   freedom and citizenship, Black people for chattel slave labor. The
   Confederate surrender at Appomattox Court House and the subsequent
   adoption by the U.S. Congress of the Thirteenth Amendment destroyed the
   institution of American slavery and threw southern society into
   disarray. The foundation of southern society had been shaken, but
   southern whites used Black Codes and racial terrorism to reassert
   control over formerly enslaved people.
   [79]This Harper's Weekly print shows a member of the Ku Klux Klan
   firing a gun into a Black home.

   The Ku Klux Klan was just one of a number of vigilante groups that
   arose after the war to terrorize African Americans and Republicans
   throughout the South. The KKK brought violence into the voting polls,
   the workplace, and -- as seen in this Harper's Weekly print -- the
   homes of Black Americans. Frank Bellew, Visit of the
   Ku-Klux,"1872. [80]Wikimedia.

   Racial violence in the Reconstruction period took three major forms:
   riots against Black political authority, interpersonal fights, and
   organized vigilante groups. There were riots in southern cities several
   times during Reconstruction. The most notable were the riots in Memphis
   and New Orleans in 1866, but other large-scale urban conflicts erupted
   in places including Laurens, South Carolina, in 1870; Colfax,
   Louisiana, in 1873; another in New Orleans in 1874; Yazoo City,
   Mississippi, in 1875; and Hamburg, South Carolina, in 1876. Southern
   cities grew rapidly after the war as migrants from the
   countryside--particularly freed people--flocked to urban centers.
   Cities became centers of Republican control. But white conservatives
   chafed at the influx of Black residents and the establishment of
   biracial politics. In nearly every conflict, white conservatives
   initiated violence in reaction to Republican rallies or conventions or
   elections in which Black men were to vote. The death tolls of these
   conflicts remain incalculable, and victims were overwhelmingly Black.

   Even everyday violence between individuals disproportionally targeted
   African Americans during Reconstruction. African Americans gained
   citizenship rights like the ability to serve on juries as a result of
   the Civil Rights Act of 1866 and the Fourteenth Amendment. But southern
   white men were almost never prosecuted for violence against Black
   victims. White men beat or shot Black men with relative impunity, and
   did so over minor squabbles, labor disputes, long-standing grudges, and
   crimes of passion. These incidents sometimes were reported to local
   federal authorities like the army or the Freedmen's Bureau, but more
   often than not such violence was unreported and unprosecuted.^[81]31

   The violence committed by organized vigilante groups, sometimes called
   nightriders or bushwhackers, was more often premeditated. Groups of
   nightriders operated under cover of darkness and wore disguises to
   curtail Black political involvement. Nightriders harassed and killed
   Black candidates and officeholders and frightened voters away from the
   polls. They also aimed to limit Black economic mobility by terrorizing
   freedpeople who tried to purchase land or otherwise become too
   independent from the white enslavers they used to rely on. They were
   terrorists and vigilantes, determined to stop the erosion of the
   antebellum South, and they were widespread and numerous, operating
   throughout the South. The Ku Klux Klan emerged in the late 1860s as the
   most infamous of these groups.

   The Ku Klux Klan (KKK) was organized in 1866 in Pulaski, Tennessee, and
   had spread to nearly every state of the former Confederacy by 1868. The
   Klan drew heavily from the antebellum southern elite, but Klan groups
   sometimes overlapped with criminal gangs or former Confederate
   guerrilla groups. The Klan's reputation became so potent, and its
   violence so widespread, that many groups not formally associated with
   it were called Ku Kluxers, and to "Ku Klux" meant to commit vigilante
   violence. While it is difficult to differentiate Klan actions from
   those of similar groups, such as the White Line, the Knights of the
   White Camellia, and the White Brotherhood, the distinctions hardly
   matter. All such groups were part of a web of terror that spread
   throughout the South during Reconstruction. In Panola County,
   Mississippi, between August 1870 and December 1872, twenty-four
   Klan-style murders occurred. And nearby, in Lafayette County, Klansmen
   drowned thirty Black Mississippians in a single mass murder. Sometimes
   the violence was aimed at Black men or women who had tried to buy land
   or dared to be insolent toward a white southerner. Other times, as with
   the beating of Republican sheriff and tax collector Allen Huggins, the
   Klan targeted white politicians who supported freedpeople's civil
   rights. Numerous Republican politicians, perhaps dozens, were killed,
   either while in office or while campaigning. Thousands of individual
   citizens, men and women, white and Black, had their homes raided and
   were whipped, raped, or murdered.^[82]32

   The federal government responded to southern paramilitary tactics by
   passing the Enforcement Acts between 1870 and 1871. The acts made it
   criminal to deprive African Americans of their civil rights. The acts
   also deemed violent Klan behavior as acts of rebellion against the
   United States and allowed for the use of U.S. troops to protect
   freedpeople. For a time, the federal government, its courts, and its
   troops, sought to put an end to the KKK and related groups. But the
   violence continued. By 1876, as southern Democrats reestablished "home
   rule" and "redeemed" the South from Republicans, federal opposition to
   the KKK weakened. National attention shifted away from the South and
   the activities of the Klan, but African Americans remained trapped in a
   world of white supremacy that restricted their economic, social, and
   political rights.
   [83]This Harper's Weekly print shows a soldier in the Freedmen's Bureau
   standing between a group or armed and angry white men and a group of
   Black men.

   The federal government created the Freedmen's Bureau to assist freed
   people in securing their rights and their livelihoods. In this Harper's
   Weekly print, The Freedmen's Bureau official protecting the Black men
   and women from the angry and riotous mob of white Americans stood as a
   representation of the entire Bureau. Soon the Bureau and the federal
   government would recognize that they could not accomplish a fraction of
   what they set out to do, including keeping African Americans safe and
   free in the South. Alfred R. Waud, The Freedmen's Bureau,
   1868. [84]Library of Congress.

   White conservatives would assert that Republicans, in denouncing
   violence, were "waving a bloody shirt" for political opportunity. The
   violence, according to many white conservatives, was fabricated, or not
   as bad as it was claimed, or an unavoidable consequence of the
   enfranchisement of African Americans. On December 22, 1871, R. Latham
   of Yorkville, South Carolina, wrote to the New York Tribune, voicing
   the beliefs of many white southerners as he declared that "the same
   principle that prompted the white men at Boston, disguised as Indians,
   to board, during the darkness of night, a vessel with tea, and throw
   her cargo into the Bay, clothed some of our people in Ku Klux gowns,
   and sent them out on missions technically illegal. Did the Ku Klux do
   wrong? You are ready to say they did and we will not argue the point
   with you. . . . Under the peculiar circumstances what could the people
   of South Carolina do but resort to Ku Kluxing?"^[85]33

   Victims and witnesses to the violence told a different story. Sallie
   Adkins of Warren County, Georgia, was traveling with her husband,
   Joseph, a Georgia state senator, when he was assassinated by Klansmen
   on May 10, 1869. She wrote President Ulysses S. Grant, asking for both
   physical protection and justice. "I am no Statesman," she disclaimed;
   "I am only a poor woman whose husband has been murdered for his
   devotion to his country. I may have very foolish ideas of Government,
   States & Constitutions. But I feel that I have claims upon my country.
   The Rebels imprisoned my Husband. Pardoned Rebels murdered him. There
   is no law for the punishment of them who do deeds of this sort. . . . I
   demand that you, President Grant, keep the pledge you made the
   nation--make it safe for any man to utter boldly and openly his
   devotion to the United States."^[86]34

   The political and social consequences of the violence were as lasting
   as the physical and mental trauma suffered by victims and witnesses.
   Terrorism worked to end federal involvement in Reconstruction and
   helped to usher in a new era of racial repression.

   African Americans actively sought ways to shed the vestiges of slavery.
   Many discarded the names their former enslavers had chosen for them and
   adopted new names like "Freeman" and "Lincoln" that affirmed their new
   identities as free citizens. Others resettled far from their former
   plantations, hoping to eventually farm their own land or run their own
   businesses. By the end of Reconstruction, the desire for
   self-definition, economic independence, and racial pride coalesced in
   the founding of dozens of Black towns across the South. Perhaps the
   most well-known of these towns was Mound Bayou, Mississippi, a Delta
   town established in 1887 by Isaiah Montgomery and Ben Green, formerly
   enslaved by Joseph and Jefferson Davis. Residents of the town took
   pride in the fact that African Americans owned all of the property in
   town, including banks, insurance companies, shops, and the surrounding
   farms. The town celebrated African American cultural and economic
   achievements during their annual festival, Mound Bayou Days. These
   tight-knit communities provided African Americans with spaces where
   they could live free from the indignities of segregation and the
   exploitation of sharecropping on white-owned plantations.^[87]35


      VI. Economic Development during the Civil War and Reconstruction

   [88]This photograph shows the ruins of Atlanta, Georgia in 1866.

   George N. Barnard, City of Atlanta, Ga., no. 1, c. 1866. [89]Library of
   Congress.

   The Civil War destroyed and then transformed the American economy. In
   1859 and 1860, wealthy southern planters were flush after producing
   record cotton crops. Southern prosperity relied on over four million
   enslaved African American to grow cotton, along with a number of other
   staple crops across the region. Cotton fed the textile mills of America
   and Europe and brought great wealth to the region. On the eve of war,
   the American South enjoyed more per capita wealth than any other slave
   economy in the New World. To their enslavers, these people constituted
   their most valuable assets, worth roughly $3 billion.^[90]36 Yet this
   wealth obscured the gains in infrastructure, industrial production, and
   financial markets that occurred north of the Mason-Dixon Line, a fact
   that the war would unmask for all to see.

   In contrast to the slave South, northerners praised their region as a
   land of free labor, populated by farmers, merchants, and wage laborers.
   It was also home to a robust market economy. By 1860, northerners could
   buy clothing made in a New England factory, or light their homes with
   kerosene oil from Pennsylvania. The Midwest produced seas of grain that
   fed the country, with enough left over for export to Europe. Farther
   west, mining and agriculture were the mainstays of life. Along with the
   textile mills, shoe factories, and iron foundries, the firms that
   produced McCormick's wheat harvesters and Colt's firearms displayed the
   technical advances of northern manufacturers. Their goods crisscrossed
   the country on the North's growing railroad network. An extensive
   network of banks and financial markets helped aggregate capital that
   could be reinvested into further growth.

   The Civil War, like all wars, interrupted the rhythms of commercial
   life by destroying lives and property. This was especially true in the
   South. From 1861 onward, the Confederate government struggled to find
   the guns, food, and supplies needed to field an army. Southerners did
   make astonishing gains in industrial production during this time, but
   it was never enough. The Union's blockade of the Atlantic prevented the
   Confederacy from financing the war with cotton sales to Europe. To pay
   their troops and keep the economy alive, the Confederate Congress
   turned to printing paper money that quickly sank in value and led to
   rapid inflation. In many cases, Confederate officials dispensed with
   taxes paid in cash and simply impressed the food and materials needed
   from their citizens. Perhaps most striking of all, in the vast
   agricultural wealth of the South, many southerners struggled to find
   enough to eat.

   The war also pushed the U.S. government to take unprecedented steps.
   Congress raised tariffs and passed the first national income tax in
   1862. In late 1861, Congress created the nation's first fiat currency,
   called greenbacks. At first, the expansion of the currency and the
   rapid rise in government spending created an uptick in business in
   1862-1863. As the war dragged on, inflation also hit the North. Workers
   demanded higher wages to pay rents and buy necessities, while the
   business community groaned under their growing tax burden. The United
   States, however, never embarked on a policy of impressment for food and
   supplies. The factories and farms of the North successfully supplied
   Union troops, while the federal government, with some adjustments,
   found the means to pay for war. None of this is to suggest that the
   North's superior ability to supply its war machine made the outcome of
   the war inevitable. Any account of the war must consider the tangled
   web of politics, battles, and economics that occurred between 1861 and
   1865. But the aftermath of the war left portions of the Confederacy in
   ruins. State governments were mired in debt. White planters had most of
   their capital tied up in enslaved laborers, and so lost most of their
   wealth. Cotton remained the most significant crop, but the war changed
   how it was grown and sold. Planters broke up large farms into smaller
   plots tended by single families in exchange for a portion of the crop,
   a system called sharecropping. Once cotton production resumed,
   Americans found that their cotton now competed with new cotton
   plantations around the world. For the South as a whole, the war and
   Reconstruction marked the start of a period of deep poverty that would
   last until at least the New Deal of the 1930s.

   [91]This photograph shows a ruined locomotive in Richmond, Virginia.

   War brought destruction across the South. Governmental and private
   buildings, communication systems, the economy, and transportation
   infrastructure were all debilitated. [Richmond, Va. Crippled
   locomotive, Richmond & Petersburg Railroad depot], c. 1865. [92]Library
   of Congress.
   Emancipation was the single most important economic, social, and
   political outcome of the war. Freedom empowered African Americans in
   the South to rebuild families, make contracts, hold property, and move
   freely for the first time. Republicans in the South attempted to
   transform the region into a free-labor economy like the North. Yet the
   transition from slave labor to free labor was never so clear. Well into
   the twentieth century, white southerners used a combination of legal
   coercion and extralegal violence to maintain systems of bound labor.
   Vagrancy laws enabled law enforcement to justify the arrest of innocent
   Black men and women, and the convict-lease system meant that arbitrary
   arrests often resulted in decades of forced, uncompensated labor. But
   this new form of servitude, which continued until World War II, was
   only the most extreme example of an array of economic injustices. In
   the later nineteenth century, poor whites would form mobs and go
   "white-capping" to scare away Black job seekers.^[93]37 Lacking the
   means to buy their own farms, Black farmers often turned to
   sharecropping. Sharecropping often led to cycles of debt that kept
   families bound to the land.^[94]38

   Victory did not produce a sudden economic boom for the rest of the
   United States, either. The North would not regain its prewar pace of
   industrial and commodity output until the 1870s. But the war did prove
   beneficial to wealthy northern farmers who could afford new
   technologies. Wartime labor shortages promoted the use of mechanical
   reapers, reducing demand for labor, boosting farm yields, and sowing
   the seeds of inequality.
   [95]Sketch of Massachusetts Agricultural College (now known as the
   University of Massachusetts Amherst).

   Massachusetts Agricultural College (now known as the University of
   Massachusetts Amherst) was one of many colleges founded through the
   Federal Morrill-Land Grant Colleges Act. Massachusetts Agricultural
   College, Amherst, Mass. 1879, 1880. [96]Wikimedia.

   Wartime laws also transformed the relationship between the federal
   government and the American economy. New tariff laws sheltered northern
   industry from European competition. The Morrill Land Grant helped
   create colleges such as the University of California, the University of
   Illinois, and the University of Wisconsin. With the creation of the
   national banking system and greenbacks, Congress replaced hundreds of
   state bank notes with a system of federal currency that accelerated
   trade and exchange. This was not to say that Republican policy worked
   for everyone. The Homestead Act, meant to open the West to small
   farmers, was often frustrated by railroad corporations and speculators.
   The Transcontinental Railroad, launched during the war, failed to
   produce substantial economic gains for years.

   The war years forged a close relationship between government and the
   business elite, a relationship that sometimes resulted in corruption
   and catastrophe, as it did when markets crashed on Black Friday,
   September 24, 1869. This new relationship created a political backlash,
   especially in the West and South, against Washington's perceived
   eastern and industrial bias. Conflicts over emancipation and civil
   rights quickly gave way to long political conflict over the direction
   of American economic development.


                       VII. The End of Reconstruction

   Reconstruction ended when northerners abandoned the cause of the
   formerly enslaved and Democrats recaptured southern politics. Between
   1868 and 1877, and especially after the Depression of 1873, economic
   issues supplanted Reconstruction as the foremost issue on the national
   agenda. The biggest threat to Republican power in the South had been
   the violence and intimidation of white Democrats. Only the presence of
   federal troops in key southern cities prevented Reconstruction's quick
   collapse. But the United States never committed the personnel required
   to restore order and guarantee Black southerners the rights promised by
   the Fourteenth Amendment.

   Republicans and Democrats responded to economic uncertainty by
   retreating from Reconstruction. War-weary from a decade of military and
   political strife, so-called Stalwart Republicans turned from the
   idealism of civil rights to the practicality of economics and party
   politics. They won particular influence during Ulysses S. Grant's first
   term as president (1868-1872). By the early 1870s, Stalwart Republicans
   assumed control of Republican Party politics.

   Meanwhile, New Departure Democrats--who focused on business, economics,
   political corruption, and trade--gained strength by distancing
   themselves from pro-slavery Democrats and Copperheads. In the South,
   they were called Redeemers. White southerners initially opposed the
   Redeemers and instead clung tightly to white supremacy and the
   Confederacy, but between 1869 and 1871, the Redeemers won support from
   white southerners by promising local rule by white Democrats, rather
   than Black or white Republicans. By 1871, Redeemers won political
   control and ended Reconstruction in three important states: Tennessee,
   Virginia, and Georgia.

   In September 1873, Jay Cooke and Company declared bankruptcy, resulting
   in a bank run that spiraled into a six-year depression. The Depression
   of 1873 crushed the nation's already suffering laboring class and
   destroyed whatever remaining idealism northerners had about
   Reconstruction. In the South, where many farms were capitalized
   entirely through loans, sources of credit vanished, many landowners
   defaulted, and farmers entered an already oversaturated labor market.
   Wages plummeted and a growing system of debt peonage trapped workers in
   endless cycles of poverty. The economic turmoil enabled the Democrats
   to take control of the House of Representatives after the 1874
   elections, blunting the legislature's capacity to any longer direct
   Reconstruction.
   [97]Print of a crowd driven from Tompkins Square by the mounted police,
   in the Tompkins Square Riot of 1874.

   During the Panic of 1873, workers began demanding that the federal
   government help alleviate the strain on Americans. In January 1874,
   over 7,000 protesters congregated in New York City's Tompkins Square to
   insist the government make job creation a priority. They were met with
   brutality as police dispersed the crowd, and consequently the
   unemployment movement lost much of its steam. Matt Morgen, Print of a
   crowd driven from Tompkins Square by the mounted police, in the
   Tompkins Square Riot of 1874, January 1874. [98]Wikimedia.

   On the eve of the 1876 presidential election, the nation still reeled
   from depression. Scandals sapped trust in the Grant Administration. By
   1875, Democrats in Mississippi hatched the Mississippi Plan, a wave of
   violence designed to intimidate Black activists and suppress Black
   voters.^[99]39 The state's Republican governor pleaded for federal
   intervention, but national Republicans ignored the plea. Meanwhile,
   Rutherford B. Hayes, a Republican, won a landslide victory in the Ohio
   gubernatorial election without mentioning Reconstruction, focusing
   instead on fighting corruption and alcohol abuse and promoting economic
   recovery. His success made him a potential presidential candidate. The
   stage was set for an election that would end Reconstruction as a
   national issue.

   Republicans chose Rutherford B. Hayes as their nominee; Democrats chose
   Samuel J. Tilden, who ran on honest politics and home rule in the
   South. Florida, Louisiana, and South Carolina would determine the
   president. Despite the enduring presence of Reconstruction in those
   states, white conservatives organized violence and fraud with impunity.
   With the election results contested, a federal special electoral
   commission voted along party lines--eight Republicans for, seven
   Democrats against--in favor of Hayes.

   Democrats threatened to boycott Hayes's inauguration. Rival governments
   arose claiming to recognize Tilden as the rightfully elected president.
   Republicans, fearing another sectional crisis, reached out to
   Democrats. In what became known as the Compromise of 1877, Democrats
   conceded the presidency to Hayes on the condition that all remaining
   troops would be removed from the South and the South would receive
   special economic favors. Hayes was inaugurated in March 1877. In April,
   the remaining troops were ordered out of the South. The compromise
   allowed southern Democrats, no longer fearing reprisal from federal
   troops or northern politicians for their flagrant violence and
   intimidation of Black voters, to return to power.

   After 1877, Republicans no longer had the political capital--or
   political will--to intervene in the South in cases of violence and
   electoral fraud. In certain locations with large populations of African
   Americans, such as South Carolina, freedpeople continued to hold some
   local offices for several years. Yet, with its most revolutionary aims
   thwarted by 1868, and economic depression and political turmoil taking
   even its most modest promises off the table by the early 1870s, most of
   the promises of Reconstruction were unmet.
   Military District State          Readmission Conservative Takeover
   District 1        Virginia       1870        1870
   District 2        North Carolina 1868        1870
                     South Carolina 1868        1877
   District 3        Alabama        1868        1874
                     Florida        1868        1877
                     Georgia        1870        1871
   District 4        Arkansas       1868        1874
                     Mississippi    1870        1876
   District 5        Texas          1870        1873
                     Louisiana      1868        1877
   None              Tennessee      1866        1869

   Table. This table shows the military districts of the seceded states of
   the South, the date the state was readmitted into the Union, and the
   date when conservatives recaptured the state house.


                              VIII. Conclusion

   Reconstruction in the United States achieved Abraham Lincoln's
   paramount desire: the restoration of the Union. The war and its
   aftermath forever ended legal slavery in the United States, but African
   Americans remained second-class citizens and women still struggled for
   full participation in the public life of the United States. The closing
   of Reconstruction saw North and South reunited behind the imperatives
   of economic growth and territorial expansion, rather than ensuring the
   full rights of its citizens. From the ashes of civil war, a new nation
   faced fresh possibilities while enduring old problems.


IX. Primary Sources

   [100]1. Freedmen discuss post-emancipation life with General Sherman,
   1865

   Reconstruction began before the War ended. After his famous March to
   the Sea in January of 1865, General William T. Sherman and Secretary of
   War Edwin Stanton met with twenty of Savannah's African American
   religious leaders to discuss the future of the freedmen of the state of
   Georgia. In the excerpt below, Garrison Frazier, the chosen spokesman
   for the group, explains the importance of land for freedom. The result
   of this meeting was Sherman's famous Field Order 15, which set aside
   confiscated plantation lands along the coast from Charleston, S.C. to
   Jacksonville, FL. for Black land ownership. The policy would later be
   overruled and freedpeople would lose their right to the land.

   [101]2. Jourdon Anderson writes his former enslaver, 1865

   Black Americans hoped that the end of the Civil War would create an
   entirely new world, while white southerners tried to restore the
   antebellum order as much as they could. Most enslavers sought to
   maintain control over their formerly enslaved laborers through
   sharecropping contracts. P.H. Anderson of Tennessee was one such former
   enslaver. After the war, he contacted his formerly enslaved laborer
   Jourdon Anderson, offering him a job opportunity. The following is
   Jourdon Anderson's reply.

   [102]3. Charlotte Forten teaches freed children in South Carolina, 1864

   Charlotte Forten was born into a wealthy Black family in Philadelphia.
   After receiving an education in Salem, Massachusetts, Forten became the
   first Black American hired to teach white students. She lent her
   educational expertise to the war effort by relocating to South Carolina
   in 1862 with the goal of educating formerly enslaved people. This
   excerpt from her diary explains her experiences during this time.

   [103]4. Mississippi Black Code, 1865

   Many southern governments enacted legislation that reestablished
   antebellum power relationships. South Carolina and Mississippi passed
   laws known as Black Codes to regulate Black behavior and impose social
   and economic control. While they granted some rights to African
   Americans - like the right to own property, to marry or to make
   contracts - they also denied other fundamental rights. Mississippi's
   vagrant law, excerpted here, required all freedmen to carry papers
   proving they had means of employment. If they had no proof, they could
   be arrested, fined, or even re-enslaved and leased out to their former
   enslaver.

   [104]5. General Reynolds describes lawlessness in Texas, 1868

   Most histories of the Civil War claim that the war ended in the summer
   of 1865 when Confederate armies surrendered. However, violent
   resistance and terrorism continued in the South for over a decade. In
   this report, General J.J. Reynolds describes the lawlessness of Texas
   during Reconstruction.

   [105]6. A case of sexual violence during Reconstruction, 1866

   These documents chronicle a case in the wider wave of violence that
   targeted people of color during Reconstruction. The first document
   includes Frances Thompson and Lucy Smith's testimony about their
   assault, rape, and robbery in 1866. The second document, demonstrates
   one way that white Southerners denied these claims. In 1876, Thompson
   was exposed for cross-dressing. For twenty years she successfully
   passed as a woman. Southerners trumpeted this case as evidence that
   widely documented cases of violence, sexual and otherwise, were
   fabricated.

   [106]7. Frederick Douglass on remembering the Civil War, 1877

   Americans came together after the Civil War largely by collectively
   forgetting what the war was about. Celebrations honored the bravery of
   both armies, and the meaning of the war faded. Frederick Douglass and
   other Black leaders engaged with Confederate sympathizers in a battle
   of historical memory. In this speech, Douglass calls on Americans to
   remember the war for what it was--a struggle between an army fighting
   to protect slavery and a nation reluctantly transformed into a force
   for liberation.

   [107]8. Johnson and Reconstruction cartoon, 1866

   This print mocks Reconstruction by making several allusions to
   Shakespeare. The center illustration shows a Black soldier as Othello
   and President Andrew Johnson as Iago. Johnson's slogans "Treason is a
   crime and must be made odious" and "I am your Moses" are on the wall.
   The top left shows a riot in Memphis and at the top a riot in New
   Orleans. At the bottom, Johnson is trying to charm a Confederate
   Copperhead. General Benjamin Butler is at the bottom left, accepting
   the Confederate surrender of New Orleans in 1862. This scene is
   contrasted to the bottom right where General Philips Sheridan bows to
   Louisiana Attorney General Andrew Herron in 1866, implying a defeat
   for Reconstruction. Click on the image for more information.

   [108]9. Fifteenth Amendment print, 1870

   This 1870 print celebrated the passage of the Fifteenth Amendment. Here
   we see several of the themes most important to Black Americans during
   Reconstruction: The print celebrates the military achievements of Black
   veterans, the voting rights protected by the amendment, the right to
   marry and establish families, the creation and protection of Black
   churches, and the right to own and improve land. Unfortunately, many of
   these freedoms would be short-lived as the United States retreated from
   Reconstruction.


X. Reference Material

   This chapter was edited by Nicole Turner, with content contributions by
   Christopher Abernathy, Jeremiah Bauer, Michael T. Caires, Mari
   Crabtree, Chris Hayashida-Knight, Krista Kinslow, Ashley Mays, Keith
   McCall, Ryan Poe, Bradley Proctor, Emma Teitelman, Nicole Turner, and
   Caitlin Verboon.

   Recommended citation: Christopher Abernathy et al., "Reconstruction,"
   Nicole Turner, ed., in The American Yawp, eds. Joseph Locke and Ben
   Wright (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2018).


   Recommended Reading
     * Blight, David. Race and Reunion: The Civil War in American Memory.
       Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2001.
     * Blum, Edward J. Reforging the White Republic: Race, Religion, and
       American Nationalism, 1865-1898. Baton Rouge: LSU Press, 2007.
     * Cimbala, Paul A. Under the Guardianship of the Nation: The
       Freedmen's Bureau and the Reconstruction of Georgia, 1865-1870.
       Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2003.
     * Downs, Gregory P. After Appomattox: Military Occupation and the
       Ends of War. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2015.
     * ------. Declarations of Dependence: The Long Reconstruction of
       Popular Politics in the South, 1861-1908. Chapel Hill: University
       of North Carolina Press, 2014.
     * Edwards, Laura F. A Legal History of the Civil War and
       Reconstruction: A Nation of Rights. New York: Cambridge University
       Press, 2015.
     * Egerton, Douglas R. The Wars of Reconstruction: The Brief, Violent
       History of America's Most Progressive Era. New York: Bloomsbury
       Press, 2014.
     * Foner, Eric. Reconstruction: America's Unfinished Revolution,
       1863-1877. New York: HarperCollins, 1988.
     * Franke, Katherine M. "Becoming a Citizen: Reconstruction Era
       Regulation of African American Marriages." Yale Journal of Law and
       Humanities 11, no. 2 (1999): 251-310.
     * Hahn, Steven. A Nation Under Our Feet: Black Political Struggles in
       the Rural South from Slavery to the Great Migration. Cambridge, MA:
       Harvard University Press, 2003.
     * Higginbotham, Evelyn Brooks. Righteous Discontent: The Women's
       Movement in the Black Baptist Church, 1880-1920. Cambridge, MA:
       Harvard University Press, 1993.
     * Hunter, Tera W. To 'Joy My Freedom: Southern Black Women's Lives
       and Labors After the Civil War. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
       Press, 1998.
     * Janney, Caroline E. Remembering the Civil War: Reunion and the
       Limits of Reconciliation. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
       Press, 2013.
     * Jones, Jacqueline. Labor of Love, Labor of Sorrow: Black Women,
       Work, and the Family, from Slavery to the Present. New York: Basic
       Books, 2010.
     * Kantrowitz, Stephen. More Than Freedom: Fighting for Black
       Citizenship in a White Republic, 1829-1889. New York: Penguin,
       2012.
     * Lemann, Nicholas. Redemption: The Last Battle of the Civil War. New
       York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2006.
     * Masur, Kate. An Example for All the Land: Emancipation and the
       Struggle over Equality in Washington, D.C. Chapel Hill: University
       of North Carolina Press, 2010.
     * Nelson, Megan Kate. Ruin Nation: Destruction and the American Civil
       War. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2012.
     * Parsons, Elaine Frantz. Ku-Klux: The Birth of the Klan During
       Reconstruction. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
       2015.
     * Richardson, Heather Cox. The Death of Reconstruction: Race, Labor,
       and Politics in the Post-Civil War North, 1865-1901. Cambridge, MA:
       Harvard University Press, 2001.
     * ------. West from Appomattox: The Reconstruction of America After
       the Civil War. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2008.
     * Rosen, Hannah. Terror in the Heart of Freedom: Citizenship, Sexual
       Violence, and the Meaning of Race in the Postemancipation South.
       Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2009.
     * Saville, Julie. The Work of Reconstruction: From Slave to Wage
       Laborer in South Carolina 1860-1870. New York: Cambridge University
       Press, 1994.
     * Silber, Nina. The Romance of Reunion: Northerners and the South,
       1865-1900. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1997.
     * Wilson, Charles Reagan. Baptized in Blood: The Religion of the Lost
       Cause, 1865-1920. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2009.


   Notes
    1. Sidney Andrews, The South Since the War: As Shown by Fourteen Weeks
       of Travel and Observation in Georgia and the Carolinas (Cambridge,
       MA: Welch, Bigelow, 1866), 31. [[109]&#8617;]
    2. Eric Foner, Reconstruction: America's Unfinished Revolution,
       1863-1877 (New York: HarperCollins, 1988), xxv. [[110]&#8617;]
    3. Statutes at Large, Treaties, and Proclamations of the United States
       of America, vol. 13 (Boston: Little, Brown, 1866), 737-739.
       [111]http://www.freedmen.umd.edu/procamn.htm. [[112]&#8617;]
    4. The House Joint Resolution proposing the 13th amendment to the
       Constitution, January 31, 1865; Enrolled Acts and Resolutions of
       Congress, 1789-1999; General Records of the United States
       Government; Record Group 11; National
       Archives. [113]https://www.ourdocuments.gov/doc.php?flash=false&doc
       =40&page=transcript. [[114]&#8617;]
    5. Andrew Johnson, "Proclamation 179--Granting Full Pardon and Amnesty
       for the Offense of Treason Against the United States During the
       Late Civil War," December 25, 1868. Gerhard Peters and John T.
       Woolley, The American Presidency Project.
       [115]http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=72360. [[116]&#8617;]
    6. Edward McPherson, The Political History of the United States of
       America During the Period of Reconstruction. . . . (Washington,
       D.C.: Philp and Solomons, 1871), 80-82. [[117]&#8617;]
    7. Douglas A. Blackmon, Slavery by Another Name: The Re-enslavement of
       Black Americans from the Civil War to World War II (New York:
       Random House, 2008). [[118]&#8617;]
    8. A Century of Lawmaking for a New Nation: U.S. Congressional
       Documents and Debates, 1774-1875, Statutes at Large, 39th Congress,
       1st Session, 27.
       [119]https://memory.loc.gov/cgi-bin/ampage?collId=llsl&fileName=014
       /llsl014.db&recNum=58. [[120]&#8617;]
    9. Eric Foner, Freedom's Lawmakers: A Directory of Black Officeholders
       During Reconstruction (Baton Rouge: LSU Press, 1996).
       [[121]&#8617;]
   10. See Ward McAfee, Religion, Race, and Reconstruction: The Public
       School in the Politics of the 1870s (Albany: SUNY Press, 1998); and
       Hilary Green, Educational Reconstruction: African American Schools
       in the Urban South (New York: Fordham University Press, 2016).
       [[122]&#8617;]
   11. Foner, Freedom's Lawmakers. [[123]&#8617;]
   12. Ibid., xi. [[124]&#8617;]
   13. Leslie Harris and Daina Ramey Berry, eds., Slavery and Freedom in
       Savannah (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2014), 167.
       [[125]&#8617;]
   14. Steven Hahn et al., eds., Freedom: A Documentary History of
       Emancipation, 1861-1867, Series 3, Volume 1: Land and Labor, 1865
       (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2008), 442-444.
       [[126]&#8617;]
   15. Heather Andrea Williams, Help Me to Find My People: The African
       American Search for Family Lost in Slavery (Chapel Hill: University
       of North Carolina Press, 2012). [[127]&#8617;]
   16. Booker T. Washington, Up From Slavery (New York: Doubleday, 1900),
       30. [[128]&#8617;]
   17. Henry H. Mitchell, Black Church Beginnings: The Long-Hidden
       Realities of the First Years (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2004),
       141-174. [[129]&#8617;]
   18. Benjamin Mays and Joseph Nicholson, The Negro's Church (New York:
       Russell and Russell, 1933), 29-30. [[130]&#8617;]
   19. Foner, Reconstruction: America's Unfinished Revolution, 92.
       [[131]&#8617;]
   20. See Virginia W. Broughton, Virginia Broughton: The Life and
       Writings of a National Baptist Missionary, ed. Tomeiko Ashford
       Carter (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2010); Shirley
       Wilson Logan, We Are Coming: The Persuasive Discourse of
       Nineteenth-Century Black Women (Carbondale: Southern Illinois
       University Press, 1999), 168; and Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham,
       "Religion, Politics, and Gender: The Leadership of Nannie Helen
       Burroughs," in Judith Weisenfeld and Richard Newman, eds., This Far
       by Faith: Readings in African-American Women's Religious Biography
       (New York: Routledge, 2014), 157. [[132]&#8617;]
   21. "To the Women of the Republic," address from the Women's Loyal
       National League supporting the abolition of slavery, January 25,
       1864, SEN 38A-H20 (Kansas folder); RG 46, Records of the U.S.
       Senate, National Archives.
       [133]https://www.senate.gov/artandhistory/history/resources/pdf/Wom
       ensLoyalNationalLeague.pdf. [[134]&#8617;]
   22. Proceedings of the Eleventh National Women's Rights Convention,
       Held at the Church of the Puritans, New York, May 10, 1866 (New
       York: Johnston, 1866). [[135]&#8617;]
   23. Frederick Douglass, "We Welcome the Fifteenth Amendment: Addresses
       Delivered in New York, on 12-13 May 1869," The Frederick Douglass
       Papers. Series One, Speeches, Debates, and Interviews, eds. John W.
       Blassingame and John R. McKivigan (New Haven, CT: Yale University
       Press, 1991), 213-219. [[136]&#8617;]
   24. Faye E. Dudden, Fighting Chance: The Struggle over Woman Suffrage
       and Black Suffrage in Reconstruction America (New York: Oxford
       University Press, 2011). [[137]&#8617;]
   25. Louise Michele Newman, White Women's Rights: The Racial Origins of
       Feminism in the United States (New York: Oxford University Press,
       1999), 3-8. [[138]&#8617;]
   26. Sue Davis, The Political Thought of Elizabeth Cady Stanton: Women's
       Rights and the American Political Traditions (New York: New York
       University Press, 2008), 158. [[139]&#8617;]
   27. Caroline E. Janney, Remembering the Civil War: Reunion and the
       Limits of Reconciliation (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
       Press, 2013), 94. [[140]&#8617;]
   28. Ella Gertrude Clanton Thomas, The Secret Eye: The Journal of Ella
       Gertrude Clanton Thomas, 1848-1889, ed. Virginia Ingraham Burr
       (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1990), 272-273.
       [[141]&#8617;]
   29. David Blight, Race and Reunion: The Civil War in American Memory
       (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2001), 65-71.
       [[142]&#8617;]
   30. Carl Schurz, Report on the Condition of the South, ed. Michael
       Burlingame (1865; repr. New York: Arno Press, 1969), iii.
       [[143]&#8617;]
   31. Douglas R. Egerton, The Wars of Reconstruction: The Brief, Violent
       History of America's Most Progressive Era (New York: Bloomsbury
       Press, 2014), 296. [[144]&#8617;]
   32. Elaine Frantz Parsons, Ku-Klux: The Birth of the Klan During
       Reconstruction (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
       2015). [[145]&#8617;]
   33. "A Defense of the Ku Klux," Chester [S.C.] Reporter, January 11,
       1872. [[146]&#8617;]
   34. Sallie Adkins to Ulysses S. Grant, May 20, 1869. Letters Received,
       Source Chronological File, Container #7, 1868-1870: President's
       Letters, Folder: May-December 1869, Record Group 60, General
       Records of the Department of Justice, National Archives and Records
       Administration, College Park, Maryland. [[147]&#8617;]
   35. Nell Irvin Painter, Creating Black Americans: African-American
       History and Its Meanings, 1619 to the Present (New York: Oxford
       University Press, 2006), 158. [[148]&#8617;]
   36. Leonard L. Richards, Who Freed the Slaves? The Fight over the
       Thirteenth Amendment (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2015),
       258. [[149]&#8617;]
   37. William Fitzhugh Brundage, Lynching in the New South: Georgia and
       Virginia, 1880-1930 (Champaign: University of Illinois Press,
       1993), 23. [[150]&#8617;]
   38. Blackmon, Slavery by Another Name. [[151]&#8617;]
   39. Nicholas Lemann, Redemption: The Last Battle of the Civil War (New
       York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2006), 170-209. [[152]&#8617;]

   This entry was posted in [153]Uncategorized on [154]June 7, 2013 by
   [155]All Chapters.

Post navigation

   [156]<- 14. The Civil War [157]16. Capital and Labor ->

   [158]Creation Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 2.0 Generic (CC BY-SA 2.0)
                       [159]Stanford University Press

References

   Visible links:
   1. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/feed/
   2. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/comments/feed/
   3. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/14-the-civil-war/
   4. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/16-capital-and-labor/
   5. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/wp-json/oembed/1.0/embed?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.americanyawp.com%2Ftext%2F15-reconstruction%2F
   6. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/wp-json/oembed/1.0/embed?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.americanyawp.com%2Ftext%2F15-reconstruction%2F&format=xml
   7. http://www.AmericanYawp.com/index.html
   8. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#content
   9. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/
  10. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/about/
  11. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/jordan-constitution-speech-1974/
  12. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/brookes-print/
  13. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/casta-painting/
  14. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/contributors/
  15. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/how-the-other-half-lived-photographs-of-jacob-riis/
  16. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/introduction/
  17. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/note-on-recommended-readings/
  18. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/press/
  19. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/tweets/
  20. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/teaching-materials/
  21. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/updates/
  22. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/wp-content/uploads/contraband1.jpg
  23. https://www.loc.gov/pictures/item/cwp2003000055/PP/
  24. https://www.americanyawp.com/feedback_2018-2021/15-reconstruction/
  25. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#I_Introduction
  26. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#II_Politics_of_Reconstruction
  27. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#III_The_Meaning_of_Black_Freedom
  28. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#IV_Reconstruction_and_Women
  29. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#V_Racial_Violence_in_Reconstruction
  30. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#VI_Economic_Development_during_the_Civil_War_and_Reconstruction
  31. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#VII_The_End_of_Reconstruction
  32. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#VIII_Conclusion
  33. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#IXPrimary_Sources
  34. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#X_Reference_Material
  35. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_0_92
  36. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/wp-content/uploads/Lincoln_and_Johnsond.jpg
  37. https://www.loc.gov/pictures/item/2008661827/
  38. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_1_92
  39. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_2_92
  40. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_3_92
  41. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_4_92
  42. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_5_92
  43. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_6_92
  44. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_7_92
  45. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/wp-content/uploads/01366v.jpg
  46. https://www.loc.gov/pictures/item/2004665356/
  47. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/wp-content/uploads/15_The_First_Vote_LC-DIG-ppmsca-37947.jpg
  48. https://www.loc.gov/pictures/item/00651117/
  49. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_8_92
  50. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_9_92
  51. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_10_92
  52. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/wp-content/uploads/15_Reconstruction_First_LC-DIG-ppmsca-17564.jpg
  53. https://www.loc.gov/pictures/item/98501907/
  54. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_11_92
  55. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_12_92
  56. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_13_92
  57. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_14_92
  58. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_15_92
  59. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_16_92
  60. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_17_92
  61. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_18_92
  62. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_19_92
  63. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/wp-content/uploads/3a02558v.jpg
  64. https://www.loc.gov/pictures/item/97500087/
  65. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_20_92
  66. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_21_92
  67. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_22_92
  68. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_23_92
  69. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/wp-content/uploads/306684.jpg
  70. https://research.archives.gov/id/306684
  71. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_24_92
  72. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_25_92
  73. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/wp-content/uploads/15th-amendment-celebration-1870.jpg
  74. https://www.loc.gov/exhibits/treasures/trr060.html
  75. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_26_92
  76. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_27_92
  77. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_28_92
  78. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_29_92
  79. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/wp-content/uploads/Visit_of_the_Ku-Klux_1872.jpg
  80. https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Visit_of_the_Ku-Klux_1872.jpg
  81. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_30_92
  82. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_31_92
  83. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/wp-content/uploads/15_freedmens_LC-USZ62-105555.jpg
  84. https://www.loc.gov/pictures/item/92514996
  85. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_32_92
  86. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_33_92
  87. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_34_92
  88. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/wp-content/uploads/15_Atlanta_LC-DIG-ppmsca-18960.jpg
  89. https://www.loc.gov/pictures/item/2008679857
  90. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_35_92
  91. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/wp-content/uploads/15_Richmond_LC-B811-3258.jpg
  92. https://www.loc.gov/pictures/item/cwp2003000671/PP/
  93. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_36_92
  94. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_37_92
  95. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/wp-content/uploads/Mass_Aggie.jpg
  96. https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mass_Aggie.jpg
  97. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/wp-content/uploads/Tompkins_square_riot_1874.jpg
  98. https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tompkins_square_riot_1874.jpg
  99. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#footnote_38_92
 100. https://www.americanyawp.com/reader/reconstruction/freedmen-discuss-post-emancipation-life-with-general-sherman-1865/
 101. https://www.americanyawp.com/reader/reconstruction/jourdon-anderson-writes-his-former-master-1865/
 102. https://www.americanyawp.com/reader/reconstruction/charlotte-forten-teaches-freed-children-in-south-carolina-1864/
 103. https://www.americanyawp.com/reader/reconstruction/mississippi-black-code-1865/
 104. https://www.americanyawp.com/reader/reconstruction/general-reynolds-describes-lawlessness-in-texas-1868/
 105. https://www.americanyawp.com/reader/reconstruction/a-case-of-sexual-violence-during-reconstruction-1866/
 106. https://www.americanyawp.com/reader/reconstruction/frederick-douglass-on-remembering-the-civil-war-1877/
 107. https://www.americanyawp.com/reader/johnson-and-reconstruction/
 108. https://www.americanyawp.com/reader/fifteenth-amendment/
 109. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_0_92
 110. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_1_92
 111. http://www.freedmen.umd.edu/procamn.htm
 112. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_2_92
 113. https://www.ourdocuments.gov/doc.php?flash=false&doc=40&page=transcript
 114. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_3_92
 115. http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=72360
 116. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_4_92
 117. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_5_92
 118. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_6_92
 119. https://memory.loc.gov/cgi-bin/ampage?collId=llsl&fileName=014/llsl014.db&recNum=58
 120. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_7_92
 121. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_8_92
 122. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_9_92
 123. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_10_92
 124. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_11_92
 125. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_12_92
 126. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_13_92
 127. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_14_92
 128. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_15_92
 129. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_16_92
 130. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_17_92
 131. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_18_92
 132. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_19_92
 133. https://www.senate.gov/artandhistory/history/resources/pdf/WomensLoyalNationalLeague.pdf
 134. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_20_92
 135. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_21_92
 136. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_22_92
 137. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_23_92
 138. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_24_92
 139. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_25_92
 140. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_26_92
 141. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_27_92
 142. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_28_92
 143. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_29_92
 144. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_30_92
 145. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_31_92
 146. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_32_92
 147. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_33_92
 148. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_34_92
 149. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_35_92
 150. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_36_92
 151. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_37_92
 152. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/#identifier_38_92
 153. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/category/uncategorized/
 154. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/15-reconstruction/
 155. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/author/admin/
 156. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/14-the-civil-war/
 157. https://www.americanyawp.com/text/16-capital-and-labor/
 158. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/
 159. https://www.sup.org/books/title/?id=27850

   Hidden links:
 161. https://wordpress.org/
