   #[1]alternate

   IFRAME: [2]https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-KSRWLQ

   facebook [3]Skip to main content [4]Toggle high contrast

   Search: ____________________
   (BUTTON)
   [5]Advanced search

   [6]TUC Logo Mono

     * [7]About the TUC
     * [8]Newsroom
     * [9]Blogs
     * [10]Events
     * [11]Shop
     * [12]Contact

     * [13]About unions
     * [14]Campaigns
     * [15]Research & analysis
     * [16]Workplace guidance
     * [17]Training

   About unions
   Campaigns
   Research & analysis
   Workplace guidance
   Training
   About the TUC
   Newsroom
   Blogs
   Events
   Shop
   Contact

   Back
   About Unions
   Not sure which union is right for you?
   About unions
   Two union members
   Wondering what the fuss is about?
   Why join a union?
   Union member
   Find a union for you
   Use the unionfinder tool
   In this section
   Why join a union
   Find a union for you
   Browse all unions
   How unions work
   How the TUC works with unions
   Resources for unions in dispute
   Back
   The TUCs History
   The TUC has a history of developing analysis and research to inform
   economic and employment-related issues.
   Search by topic area
   workers
   Our plan for a high wage economy and a £15 minimum wage. A return to
   normal wage growth, and an end to the longest pay squeeze.
   Report: Raising pay for everyone
   Retail staff
   The TUC produces a wide range of research and analysis reports
   Latest TUC reports
   Topics
   Global solidarity
   Health and safety
   Industrial strategy
   Pensions and benefits
   Public services and transport
   Corporate Governance and responsibility
   Economy, jobs and pay
   Equality
   Rights at work
   Union organising
   Work and technology
   More
   Our experts
   Back
   Union member action
   Nothing beats being a union member, but if you are looking for
   particular guidance on a workplace issue have a look at our workplace
   guidance.
   Go to workplace guidance
   Two union members listening
   Are you a union rep looking for help and advice to support your
   colleagues at work? Take a look at our wide range of resources.
   Go to reps guidance
   Coronavirus - Guidance for unions
   This guide is for union reps - understanding coronavirus and workplace
   issues, employer negotiations and how best protect the workforce
   Coronavirus - Guidance for unions
   Topics
   Basic rights and contracts
   Dismissal, redundancy and grievance
   Equality and discrimination
   Family-friendly work
   Health, safety and wellbeing
   Learning, skills and training
   Organising and bargaining
   Pay, holiday and working hours
   More
   Support for reps

     *
     * /
       [18]Research & analysis
     *

Still rigged: racism in the UK labour market

   Report type
   Research and reports
   Issue date
   31 Aug 2022
   Foreword

   This important and sobering report lifts the lid on racism in our
   labour market. Based on extensive polling, it provides quantitative
   evidence of the scale of workplace discrimination facing Black [19]1
   workers. And it offers an insight into the insidious way in which this
   racism undermines their lives, livelihoods, and life chances.

   Carried out under the auspices of our Anti-Racism Taskforce, the TUC's
   research shows that racism scars every aspect of working life. As well
   as determining who gets hired and fired, it also shapes Black workers'
   day-to-day experiences, from training and promotion opportunities to
   the allocation of shifts and holidays. Many BME workers also told us
   they have experienced bullying, harassment and worse. Alarmingly, the
   vast majority did not report this to their employer.

   Unsurprisingly, all this comes at a huge cost. Black workers' mental
   health suffers. Their confidence takes a hit. And many suffer in-work
   poverty, sometimes having to do two, or even three, jobs to make ends
   meet. This racism doesn't just wreck lives - it's used to divide
   working people and makes us all weaker.

   As the global struggle for racial justice has intensified, race
   equality has become prominent on the political agenda. The Covid-19
   pandemic highlighted inequalities hardwired into our economy and
   society, with BME workers more likely to do dangerous work, more likely
   to contract the virus and more likely to die from it. We know too that
   Black workers are on the frontline of insecure work, being massively
   over-represented on zero-hours contracts and in low-paid jobs. And this
   makes them especially vulnerable to the cost-of-living emergency now
   hammering working people.

   This study underlines the overwhelming need for change. Despite
   commissioning report after report on race equality, the government has
   consistently failed to deliver the reforms we need. Instead of
   addressing the causes and consequences of discrimination, ministers
   have chosen to pursue dangerous narratives about race that divide
   working people.

   That's why unions must put the fight against racism at the heart of our
   organising, bargaining and campaigning work. We must build solidarity
   among working people, showing that the debates about class and race in
   modern Britain are fundamentally linked. And we must lead by example
   and meet the aspirations of our Black members for better work. As this
   research makes clear, many had a positive experience of homeworking
   during the pandemic, underlining why we need genuine flexibility for
   all.

   But unions can't do it all alone. This report ought to act as a wake-up
   call for employers, policymakers and politicians. The scale of the
   challenge we face demands structural, institutional and legislative
   change. And where better to start than by introducing mandatory
   Ethnicity Pay Gap Reporting - alongside Action Plans to address
   discrepancies?

   Now is not the time for incremental measures or half-hearted policy
   initiatives, but for transformative change. The trade union movement
   will keep fighting for radical action to address racism in our labour
   market. We believe Britain at work should be Britain at its best -
   fair, inclusive and equal. Black workers deserve nothing less.

   Frances O'Grady, TUC General Secretary
     * [20]1 The TUC uses the term `Black workers' to indicate people of
       colour with a shared history. `Black' is used in a broad political
       and inclusive sense to describe people in the UK who have suffered
       from colonialism and enslavement in the past and continue to
       experience racism and diminished opportunities.

   Please note this report includes racist comments shared with us by
   focus group participants to illustrate their experiences of everyday
   racism. These may trigger unwelcome and distressing memories or
   thoughts for some readers. Resources for support can be found at the
   end of this report.

Executive Summary

   Racism does not exist in a vacuum. It is multi-faceted, multi-layered
   and emerges from established values and practices that are deeply
   embedded within our institutions and structures. Often workplace racism
   is wrongly reduced to either a series of random one-off events and/ or
   the implicit attitudes and unconscious biases of an individual. The
   findings of this report remind us that racism remains a critical
   feature of workplace structures and culture and everyday working life
   for a significant number of people in this country.

   We must recognise and address the fact that racist ideas and racial
   inequality in the labour market rely on a series of everyday workplace
   practices for their reproduction. The types of racism that are referred
   to in this report are `everyday racism' (also referred to as individual
   racism), institutional racism and structural racism.

   Everyday racism describes recurrent, systemic, and familiar practices
   within society that work to the detriment of BME people. It can consist
   of `banter' and being marked out as being different from other dominant
   groups at work. It can consist of everyday slights, snubs or insults
   that can make us feel unwelcome, second-class or stereotyped.

   Following the Stephen Lawrence Inquiry in 1999[21]2 , institutional
   racism in the UK was defined as "the collective failure of an
   organisation to provide an appropriate and professional service to
   people because of their colour, culture, or ethnic origin. It can be
   seen or detected in processes, attitudes and behaviour which amount to
   discrimination through unwitting prejudice, ignorance, thoughtlessness,
   and racial stereotyping which disadvantage minority ethnic people."

   Structural racism refers to wider political and social disadvantage and
   affects individuals daily. Racism is a system of domination and
   oppression with a deep-rooted historical foundation. It divides and
   organises society in a way that structurally disadvantages certain
   ethnic groups. For example, consider the fact that BME households have
   higher rates of poverty[22]3  or the high rates of death from Covid-19
   among BME groups.[23]4

   To paint a contemporary picture of BME people's experiences of racism
   at work, the TUC commissioned Number Cruncher Politics to carry out
   polling on experiences of

   discrimination in the UK, the impact of the pandemic - including
   working from home - on BME workers, and what BME workers think of
   employer action on tackling racism. The polling is based on a weighted
   sample of 1,750 Black and Ethnic Minority workers in the UK, which we
   believe is the largest representative poll ever carried out to look at
   the experiences of BME people at work.

   We asked people to tell us about their experiences at work: if they had
   been racially harassed, attacked or bullied, if they had been treated
   differently by their employer because of their race (e.g., by being
   denied promotion, access to training or being unfairly disciplined). We
   also asked people to tell us about their experiences of raising issues
   of racism in the workplace; how their employers responded to their
   complaint, what support they were able to get and what impact the
   experience of workplace racism had on their lives outside of work.

   The evidence captured in this report reveals the systemic nature of
   racism and highlights that workplace racism and racial inequality must
   be addressed through substantive structural, institutional and
   legislative reform.

   The findings reveal both the structural racism that traps Black workers
   in lower paid and insecure jobs, and the everyday experience of racism.
   Almost one in five BME workers (18 per cent) had to work two or more
   jobs for financial reasons. 15 per cent have worked on a zero-hours
   contract at some point in the past five years and a similar proportion
   (13 per cent) have had working hours changed at short notice.

   Two in five BME workers reported experiencing racism at work in the
   last five years. Those who reported experiencing at least one form of
   harassment were asked to think back to the most recent incident.Over
   half believe that their treatment was at least partly due to their race
   or ethnic background.

   In terms of everyday racism, BME workers were asked to select all types
   of harassment that they have experienced at work in the past five
   years.

   The most common responses were:
     * racist jokes or banter (27 per cent)
     * being made to feel uncomfortable at work due to, for example,
       people using stereotypes or commenting on their appearance (26 per
       cent)
     * being bullied or harassed (21 per cent)
     * racist remarks directed at them or made in their presence (21 per
       cent)

   Incidents of racism and discrimination have a clear negative impact on
   BME workers. Around a third reported that the most recent incident left
   them feeling less confident at work (35 per cent), and a similar
   proportion said it made them feel embarrassed (34 per cent) and had a
   negative impact on their mental health (31 per cent).

   The vast majority of those subjected to harassment do not tell their
   employer. Only 19 per cent of those who had experienced harassment
   reported the most recent incident to their employer. Those subjected to
   harassment were more likely to tell their family or friends (41 per
   cent), a work colleague (34 per cent), or do nothing (24 per cent).
   Only six per cent told their trade union - although this does rise to
   20 per cent among trade union members.

   Reporting an incident to an employer, in the majority of instances,
   doesn't lead to action being taken to prevent future harassment. Action
   was taken to prevent harassment in just 29 per cent of cases, and in 24
   per cent of cases, no action was taken. 44 per cent of those who had
   experienced harassment but didn't report it said they didn't think the
   issue would be taken seriously. These findings are a clear example of
   how institutional racism manifests in workplaces across the UK.

   Racism is part of the fabric of British society, its insidious
   operations and deep institutionalisation means that for centuries it
   has been operating at varying degrees and levels. The experiences
   shared with us by BME workers and the polling data on racism in the
   labour market reinforces this. There is an urgent need to effectively
   tackle racism and achieve a significant and sustained change in
   workplace culture. Key to the change needed is one of mindset. Too
   often, racism is only seen as a problem when an individual incident is
   identified - such as when someone gets abused or are treated
   differently because of their race.

   What is needed instead is a collective, pre-emptive response that
   promotes equality and dignity for everyone, gives confidence to all
   staff that they need not stand for discrimination or bullying, and
   makes dealing with racism at work everyone's responsibility. To achieve
   this change, government, employers, enforcement bodies and trade unions
   must work together to:
     * Ensure that the workers at the sharp end of structural racism get a
       better deal. Black workers are significantly more likely to
       experience insecure and poor-quality work. Raising the floor of
       rights for everyone will have a disproportionately positive impact
       on Black workers and make it harder for employers to operate a
       two-tier workforce.
     * Ensure that employers have a duty to embed race equality practices
       in their workplaces. Employers should be responsible for taking
       corrective and preventative action. They must ensure that they take
       measurable steps to prevent situations in which their employees are
       at risk of encountering everyday and institutional racism.
     * Ensure that there are swift and effective penalties when workers
       experience racism.  Everyone deserves to be treated with respect
       and dignity at work. All forms of alleged harassment and bullying
       must be dealt with seriously and swiftly.

Introduction

   The murder of George Floyd on 25 May 2020 in Minneapolis, Minnesota
   reignited the Black Lives Matter (BLM) movement in the USA and forced a
   public discussion about the nature of racism in society globally. The
   Black Lives Matters protest in the UK - most notably highlighted by the
   toppling of the statue of the slave trader Edward Colston in July 2020-
   challenged the national historical narrative about Britain's
   involvement in slavery, colonialism, and Empire and how this links to
   contemporary race discrimination in the UK. This discussion has been
   largely absent from recent public debate and was last prominent during
   the early and mid-2000s in the context of the war on terror.

   The impact of disproportionate levels of death experienced by Black
   workers during the coronavirus pandemic shone a spotlight on the
   entrenched institutional racism experienced by Black communities.
   Covid-19 unveiled a pandemic of inequalities rife within BME
   communities. From the over-policing of Black communities, to the
   creeping realisation that because BME people are significantly more
   likely to live in poverty, they were at greater risk of overcrowding
   and therefore faced increased risk of contracting coronavirus.[24]5

   The current broader right-wing political developments and media
   discourses have legitimised and normalised racism, xenophobia, and
   anti-immigrant sentiment. This discourse plays a destructive role in
   shaping the forms of racism people continue to encounter in their
   everyday working lives. Numerous reports produced over the years - some
   commissioned by the government- have recommended action to tackle
   institutional racism and entrenched disadvantage. If these
   recommendations had been acted on, BME workers would perhaps not have
   suffered the disproportionate number of deaths during this crisis.

   The government's response to date has failed to accept the extent to
   which institutional racism plays a part in the lived experiences of
   Black workers in the labour market. Indeed, the government's own
   Commission on Race and Ethnic Disparities attempted to roll back the
   conclusions of Sir Robert Macpherson's report into the murder of
   Stephen Lawrence by denying that institutional racism exists.

   And `Inclusive Britain', the 2022 government response to the report of
   the Commission on Race and Ethnic Disparities, fails to address the
   fundamental issues of race discrimination faced by Black workers in the
   labour market. Its only response to the problems of racial
   discrimination in the workplace is to a commitment to publish advice
   for employers who may want to introduce ethnic pay gap reporting. It
   fails to address the daily racism faced by Black workers. Previous TUC
   research[25]6  has shown that Black workers are: -
     * More likely to be disciplined
     * More likely to have low scores on performance appraisals
     * More likely to be given the more challenging and less popular tasks
     * More likely to be unfairly criticised
     * More likely to suffer harassment or violence
     * More likely to be bullied
     * Less likely to get access to training
     * Less likely to be given development opportunities or be allowed to
       act up to a senior level
     * Less likely to get access to promotion

   A core problem with the government's response to racism overall is that
   it fails to recognise that whilst workers from different ethnic groups
   may have different experiences in the workplace, this does not mean
   they do not have a shared experience of racism. These different
   experiences result from class, historical and contemporary migration
   patterns into the UK which have resulted in occupational segregation.
   Continuing racial stereotyping of different groups reinforces this
   segregation.

   Racism clearly shapes the type of jobs people have access to, and the
   pay they receive when they do those jobs. For example, recent TUC
   research shows us that one in six (14.6 per cent) of Black and Minority
   Ethnic workers are likely to be in insecure work, compared to 11.15 per
   cent of White workers in this position.[26]7  Ministers have ignored
   the growth in casualisation suffered by Black workers who are
   disproportionately trapped in temporary jobs, agency jobs and
   zero-hours contracts. This trend has resulted in high levels of in-work
   poverty, resulting in Black workers being trapped in low-waged
   occupations and in situations where they are expected to do the most
   demanding and dangerous work.

   The TUC believes that the economic position of people in Black
   communities, the racism that shapes their lived experience and the role
   that race inequality plays in the world of work, as the pandemic
   demonstrated, needs urgent addressing.

   Racism can determine who gets hired, trained, promoted, retained,
   demoted, and dismissed. The evidence presented in this report further
   demonstrates that it is wrong to dismiss talk of racism and racial
   inequality. The structuring role of racism is such that it shapes the
   class position, class experience and class relations between workers
   and employers. Racism plays an important role in explaining why people
   racialised as non-White are more likely to find themselves in low-paid,
   non-permanent, low-hours jobs.

   But the impact of racism doesn't stop at job selection or pay. Black
   workers experience everyday racism, which both damages their mental
   health, acts to reinforce their marginalisation within workplaces, and
   damages their chances of getting on.

   In commissioning this report, the TUC's Anti-Racism Taskforce seeks to
   ensure that the voices of Black workers are heard and that their daily
   experience informs the actions that must be taken to tackle racism in
   the workplace. If these experiences are ignored, then, as in the past,
   the policies and practices implemented will not result in the scale of
   change we need.

Research methodology - Focus groups and polling

   In early 2021 Number Cruncher Politics conducted four focus group
   interviews of BME workers active in the labour market. The four groups
   were demographically and geographically segmented and consisted of:
     * BME women - above the age of 40 - London
     * BME women - under 40 - non-London
     * BME men - under 40 - London
     * BME men - above the age of 40 - non-London

   In 2022, Number Cruncher Politics followed up this research with
   polling on BME workers. The polling is based on a weighted sample of
   1,750 Black and Ethnic Minority workers in the UK. Interviews were
   completed online between 1 February and 1 May 2022.

   The sample frame was BME adults aged 18 to 64, UK-wide, whose ILO
   economic activity was employed (including self-employed) or unemployed
   having previously worked, and who were not currently in full-time
   education. This population is young, urban, and highly educated. Among
   them 66 per cent were under-45, 41 per cent live in London, 61 per cent
   have higher education (NVQ level 4+), and 65 per cent were born outside
   the UK. The ethnic breakdown was 54 per cent Asian, 24 per cent Black,
   11 per cent Mixed Race, and 12 per cent Other ethnicities.

   Polling of BME populations presents a number of challenges. It is
   rarely done, and samples have historically tended to overrepresent
   those who are more affluent, better integrated, UK-born rather than
   immigrants, and specific ethnic groups. This has made it difficult to
   research the views of BME Britain, and in turn has contributed to an
   information vacuum, which work, such as this, seeks to address. Number
   Cruncher has done considerable work to achieve representative samples
   of the UK's BME communities - in this case, the BME workforce
   specifically.

   In part, this involves many of the same considerations applicable to
   general population polling under real world conditions, such as
   properly representing younger respondents, those in urban areas and
   those less interested in politics and current affairs. But it also
   involves specific consideration of the harder-to-reach sections of BME
   communities, and the often-complex demographic and other biases
   traditionally found when polling them.

   Number Cruncher's online sampling is designed to avoid or reduce these
   biases in raw samples as far as possible. This is done by using a
   mixture of online sampling outside of traditional survey panels,
   together with vetting the panels used, to ensure high sample quality.
   Where necessary, remaining biases are removed via quotas and weights.
   This is done either directly (education, country of birth, and so on)
   or indirectly via geography.

Everyday racism at work

   Everyday racism at work can involve being a victim of racial comments
   and jokes - sometimes inexplicit jokes that have deep rooted undertones
   of racial stereotypes and prejudice. Over time, these experiences build
   up and can lead to under-confidence, have detrimental impact on mental
   health and damage positive social relations at work. Everyday racism
   can also consist of overtly racist language directed at BME people and
   even physical assault.

   2 in 5 BME workers reported experiencing racism at work in the last
   five years. BME workers were asked to select all types of harassment
   that they have experienced at work in the past five years. The most
   common responses were:
     * racist jokes or banter (27 per cent)
     * being made to feel uncomfortable at work due to, for example,
       people using stereotypes or commenting on appearance (26 per cent)
     * being bullied, or harassed (21 per cent)
     * racist remarks directed at you or made in your presence (21 per
       cent).

     * [27]2 [28]https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploa
       ds/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/277111/4262.pdf
     * [29]3 [30]https://commonslibrary.parliament.uk/income-inequality-by
       -ethnic-group/
     * [31]4 [32]https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/dying-jo
       b-racism-and-risk-work
     * [33]5Nagesh, A. (2020), 'How coronavirus tore through Britain's
       ethnic minorities', BBC News, Online, 2 June 2020
     * [34]6 [35]https://hummedia.manchester.ac.uk/institutes/code/researc
       h/projects/racism-at-work/tuc-full-report.pdf
     * [36]7 [37]InsecureWork.pdf (tuc.org.uk)

   1

   There were some differences by gender, with BME men being more likely
   to have experienced racist jokes or banter than women (30 per cent to
   24 per cent), to have experienced verbal abuse or seen it happen to
   others (22 per cent to 16 per cent) and to have witnessed racist verbal
   or physical abuse of others at work or at work-organised social events
   (22 per cent compared to 18 per cent). BME women are more likely to
   have been excluded from workplace related social events (16 per cent to
   12 per cent).

   Young BME workers (18-24) were significantly more likely to experience
   racist jokes or banter (40 per cent compared to 27 per cent among all
   BME workers). In general, young BME workers were more likely to have
   experienced each type of harassment, with the exception of being
   excluded from work related meetings or conversations.

   Young BME workers were almost twice as likely as any other age group to
   have seen racist literature or music distributed in the workplace (20
   per cent, compared to 11 per cent of those aged 25-34, 7 per cent of
   those aged 35-44, 6 per cent of those aged 45-54 and 0 per cent of
   those aged 55-64).

What happened after the most recent incident?

   Those who reported experiencing at least one form of harassment were
   asked to think back to the most recent incident. Over half believe that
   their treatment was at least partly due to their race or ethnic
   background.

   The most common perpetrator of harassment was a colleague (38 per
   cent). In one in six instances (17 per cent), the perpetrator was a
   direct manager or someone else with direct authority. In 15 per cent of
   cases, the perpetrator was a customer, client, or patient. Given that
   BME workers make up just 14% of the workforce[38]8 , 'These findings
   demonstrate the prevalence of racism at work - and how that determines
   who is deemed to belong, and on what terms.

   Such incidents have a clear negative impact on BME workers:
     * Around a third reported that the most recent incident left them
       feeling less confident at work (35 per cent)
     * 34 per cent said it made them feel embarrassed
     * 31 per cent said it had a negative impact on their mental health.
     * Around a quarter (26 per cent) of those who have experienced
       harassment said the most recent incident had left them wanting to
       leave their job, but financial or other factors made it impossible
       to do so.

     * [39]8 [40]A09: Labour market status by ethnic group - Office for
       National Statistics (ons.gov.uk)

   2

Reporting an incident

   The vast majority of those subjected to harassment do not tell their
   employer. Only 19 per cent of those who have experienced harassment
   reported the most recent incident to their employer. Those subjected to
   harassment are more likely to tell their family or friends (41 per
   cent), a work colleague (34 per cent), or do nothing (24 per cent).
   Only 6 per cent told their trade union - although this does rise to 20
   per cent among trade union members.

   Of those who did report an incident to an employer only 38 per cent
   were satisfied, and 48 per cent were dissatisfied with how it was
   handled. Reporting an incident to an employer, in the majority of
   instances, didn't lead to action being taken to prevent future
   harassment. Action was taken to prevent future harassment in only 29
   per cent of cases, and in 24 per cent of cases, no action was taken.

   A quarter of cases resulted in a formal investigation (24 per cent) and
   15 per cent led to informal investigation. 17 per cent saw disciplinary
   action taken against the perpetrator, and 9 per cent saw some other
   type of action taken against the perpetrator. Some of those who
   reported incidents received negative treatment as a result: 7 per cent
   were transferred to another department or workplace, 3 per cent were
   disciplined and 3 per cent were subject to a counter complaint.

   Of those who did report the incident to their employer:
     * 59 per cent said they were treated better by their employer as a
       result
     * 31 per cent said there was no change
     * 7 per cent said it made their treatment worse

   Of those incidents reported to employers:
     * 19 per cent of complaints were ignored and 7 per cent weren't
       believed
     * Only a third (32 per cent) were formally investigated
     * Only one in five were dealt with fairly (19 per cent), dealt with
       promptly (21 per cent) or taken seriously (20 per cent)

   The polling also looks at why people don't report incidents of
   harassment to their employer. The most common reasons given for not
   reporting the most recent incident of harassment are:
     * I didn't think the issue would be taken seriously (44 per cent of
       those who had experienced harassment but didn't report it)
     * I was worried about the impact on my working relationship with
       colleagues (26 per cent)
     * I had no confidence that the incident would be addressed (20 per
       cent)
     * I thought I would be treated worse by my employer if I reported (19
       per cent)

   The BME workers we interviewed in our focus groups similarly described
   their experiences of everyday racism at work. Some have stated that
   their employers get them "confused" with other BME colleagues which
   makes them feel like they are seen as one bloc rather than as
   individuals, and ultimately can lead to feeling isolated and invisible
   at work. Others stated how their names have been mispronounced and
   spelt incorrectly. They noted that if they were to bring these issues,
   they fear being labelled as a "troublemaker".

   The survey participants who opted not to report the incident of
   harassment they had faced to their employer may have done so because
   they were all too aware of how it can negatively impact their treatment
   at work, and/or limit further opportunities.

"When I go into a class, for example, of the first thing that the children
asked me is 'Miss Where are you from?' because I don't have a British
accent."

"My name is not an English name therefore, because it has a 'q', it doesn't
by default have to have a 'u' in there, which is what English people seem to
think. If it was the other way around and you decided to misspell their name
on every occasion, I'm sure it would get to a point where it will start
bothering them as well."

   Experiences of everyday racism, such as microaggressions, need to be
   integrated within the larger picture of racism which operates in the
   UK. Much contemporary racism is tied to the unaddressed underpinnings
   of the British state, such as slavery, colonialism and nationalism,
   which have allowed racism to flourish. Ignoring the history of racism
   in the UK feeds into its proliferation. When these instances of
   everyday racism remain unchallenged, they threaten to further embed
   structural racism. We therefore cannot be passive when it comes to
   confronting racist thinking and actions.

"My colleague made a statement to the effect of, 'it wouldn't happen like
that in your country, would it?'"

"[They say] stuff like `black monkey, go back to your country'"

   Racist bullying and harassment are a constant part of BME workers
   experiences of everyday racism at work. Sometimes this is directed at
   them by their managers and colleagues and other times by customers or
   students. If workplace racism is to be taken seriously, senior leaders
   must ensure that they instil a zero-tolerance approach to workplace
   racism across the organisation and consistently across managerial
   structures.

"I ended up being on long term sick leave because I couldn't deal with her
[manager] mood swings because I didn't know how she would be from day-to-day.
She was intimidating me in front of other colleagues, she would be shouting
across the office to me. She said morning to everyone, and not even
acknowledge me."

   Not being taken seriously, being ignored, and being seen as a
   "troublemaker" for raising complaints about racism only further
   compounds the effect of the original racist experience on the victim.
   This further increases the impact that racism has on people's physical
   and mental health, resulting in them feeling more isolated. This can
   also lead to victims being forced out of the job or leaving their job
   as a result.

   BME people from different ethnicities, genders and faiths have varying
   experiences of racism. Everyday racist experiences can be intersected
   with misogynist, classist, homophobic, ableist, biphobic, transphobic,
   antisemitic and Islamophobic slurs. Individuals facing multiple forms
   of discrimination are often seen as `easier' targets, and often lack
   power in the workplace. For example, a recent report highlighted that
   75 per cent of BME women have experienced racism at work.[41]9
   Although each experience is unique and tied to the identity of an
   individual, it is also important to recognise they are all united by
   shared experiences of racism.

"[My manager] would just treat me differently compared to the other people
because I was Asian, so her behaviour was different. And every time I was
doing well at my job, she would just decrease my salary, so I was earning
less."

   The racist remarks and ignorant questioning that BME people face at
   work are shaped by broader political and media narratives. In this case
   above, the xenophobia and anti-immigrant sentiment is hard to ignore.

   The findings in this report strongly suggest that we need to start
   thinking about workplace racism as a health and safety issue.
   Participants in both the polling and focus groups have reported the
   impact of racism on their mental health and have noted having to
   undergo periods of sick leave. Some respondents even felt compelled to
   leave their job as a direct result of the impact that racism had on
   their emotional and mental well-being.

   Failing to address these experiences erases the plight of BME people at
   work. Racist experiences may lead to BME people thinking less of
   themselves, leading them to feel marginalised at work and have
   increased problems with their mental health, while perpetrators of
   racism will more likely feel emboldened by their actions and further
   strengthen their ideas of racial superiority - whether it is intended
   or "unconscious". Workplace racism can have devastating impacts and can
   lead to people giving up careers, having to take cuts in pay and having
   to seek other employment.

Structural racism in employment

   BME workers are more likely to live in areas with little investment
   from government, and high levels of concentrated poverty with
   overcrowded conditions.[42]10 This is compounded by the insecure and
   underpaid conditions these workers face in the labour market. Racism is
   not only a problem when specific incidents of racism take place. We
   must acknowledge the cumulative effect of institutional racism on BME
   workers' health, wellbeing, and ability to get on at work.

   Structural and institutional racism means BME workers face a lower
   employment rate and a higher unemployment rate than White workers.
   Alongside this, BME workers are also more likely to be in insecure work
   than White workers. While the employment rate for BME workers has
   improved over the past decade, it remains significantly below the
   employment rate for White workers (68.3 per cent compared to 77.0 per
   cent).[43]11
     * [44]9 [45]https://www.fawcettsociety.org.uk/news/landmark-report-re
       veals-75-of-women-of-colour-have-experienced-racism-at-work
     * [46]10 [47]https://commonslibrary.parliament.uk/income-inequality-b
       y-ethnic-group/
     * [48]11 Labour market statistics for BME workers can be found in the
       ONS dataset A09: Labour market status by ethnic group. They are not
       seasonally adjusted, so comparisons should be made between the same
       quarter across different years, rather than quarter-on-quarter. The
       dataset is available at:
       [49]https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/e
       mploymentandemployeetypes/datasets/labourmarketstatusbyethnicgroupa
       09

   3

   This is especially true for BME women. The employment rate for BME
   women has increased by almost 13 per cent over the past decade, yet it
   remains substantially below the employment rate for White men (61.7 per
   cent compared to 79.5 per cent). A recent report by the Fawcett Society
   found that 28 per cent of BME women (compared to 19 per cent of White
   women) reported that a manager had blocked their progression at work,
   whilst 42 per cent reported being passed over for promotion despite
   good feedback.[50]12  The road to progression for BME workers is
   littered with obstacles, and the lack of transparency and fair
   recruitment processes into senior roles plays a key part. Given this,
   it is unsurprising that such deeply entrenched discrimination directly
   impacts the physical and mental health of BME people.[51]13
     * [52]12 [53]https://www.fawcettsociety.org.uk/broken-ladders
     * [54]13Wallace, S., Nazroo, J.Y. and Bécares, L. (2016) `Cumulative
       exposure to racial discrimination across time and domains:
       Exploring racism's long-term impact on the mental health of ethnic
       minority people in the UK', American Journal of Public Health
       106(7): 1294-1300.

   4

   BME workers are overrepresented in the lowest paid occupations and
   underrepresented in the highest paid occupations.[55]14

   Black workers[56]15  are:
     * 32 per cent more likely to work in `caring, leisure and other
       service occupations'
     * 28 per cent more likely to work in `elementary occupations', which
       are primarily cleaning
     * 22 per cent less likely to work as managers, directors or senior
       officials
     * 42 per cent less likely to work in skilled trades occupations

   Black women[57]17 are:
     * 12 per cent more likely to work in `caring, leisure and other
       service occupations'
     * 24 per cent less likely to work as managers, directors or senior
       officials

Unemployment rates

   The unemployment rate for BME workers is persistently higher than the
   unemployment rate for White workers. Since current records began in
   2001, the lowest the percentage gap between the two unemployment rates
   has been 69 per cent. On average, across the twenty-year period, the
   BME unemployment rate has been 110 per cent higher (over double) the
   White unemployment rate.

   In terms of unemployment, the pandemic hit BME workers much harder than
   White workers. BME workers remain significantly more likely than White
   workers to experience unemployment whatever the economic environment.
   And unemployment trends during the pandemic bore this out: the
   unemployment rate for BME workers rose to 9.8 per cent in Q4 2020
   compared to 4.5 per cent for White workers.  BME women were
   particularly hard hit by the pandemic, with the unemployment rate for
   BME women hitting 10.9 per cent in the same quarter.

   And BME workers did not enjoy the same speed of recovery in
   unemployment rates that White workers did. A year later, in Q4 2021,
   the unemployment rate for White workers had recovered to pre-pandemic
   levels. In contrast, the unemployment rate for BME workers remained 1.9
   percentage points higher. [58]18
     * [59]14Pay in Working Class Jobs, TUC. Available at:
       [60]https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/pay-working-cl
       ass-jobs
     * [61]15 TUC analysis of Employment by sector data retrieved from
       gov.uk in July 2022. This is compared to White workers.[f/n] are:

     * 321 per cent more likely to be in the elementary cleaning
       occupations
     * 91 per cent more likely to be nurses
     * 67 per cent more like to be care workers or home carers
     * 183 per cent more likely to be sewing machinists
     * 97 per cent more likely to be bus and coach drivers
     * 243 per cent more likely to be taxicab drivers or chauffeurs
     * 79 per cent more likely to be packers, bottlers, canners and
       fillers
     * 118 per cent more likely to be security guards or in the related
       occupations
     * 84 per cent more likely to be hospital porters

   Black men

     FOOTNOTE:  Ibid.

     [62]17 Ibid.

     [63]18 [64]https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/jobs-moni
   tor-impact-pandemic-bme-employment
   5

   The BME unemployment rate has fallen back to its pre-pandemic level in
   the most recent data (for Q2 2022), but BME workers were clearly hit
   harder and for longer by the pandemic. And it's worth noting that the
   unemployment rate for BME workers remains almost twice as high as it is
   for White workers.[65]19

   Previous TUC analysis has looked at the impact of the pandemic on BME
   employment.[66]20  It seems that rising unemployment during the
   pandemic has been driven not necessarily by job losses among BME
   workers, but more BME people trying to enter the labour market but not
   managing to find jobs.

Experiences of work: hours, living costs and security

   In our polling, we asked BME workers about their experiences of work in
   the last five years. The findings show us that workplaces play a
   critical role in sustaining and reproducing structural racism.
     * Almost one in five BME workers (18 per cent) had to work two or
       more jobs for financial reasons.
     * 15 per cent have worked on a zero-hours contract at some point in
       the past five years.
     * 15 per cent have struggled to earn enough to afford basic living
       costs.
     * 9 per cent have not received sick pay when off work sick.
     * 9 per cent have been made redundant at some point in the past five
       years

Progression, working tasks and unfair criticism and scrutiny

   Feeling marginalised, pigeon-holed into specific tasks, or taken
   advantage of is a common experience for many BME workers. For example,
   BME workers being assigned less popular shifts (night-time, unsociable
   hours) than their White colleagues, unequal distribution of labour and
   holding BME workers more accountable than their White peers.[67]21

   When asked about unfair criticism and scrutiny in the workplace, one in
   seven BME workers reported facing unfair criticism (14 per cent) in the
   last five years. 8 per cent report being unfairly disciplined, and 7
   per cent have been subjected to excessive surveillance or
   scrutiny. This demonstrates how racism instils precarity for BME people
   in the workplace.

   More than one in ten BME workers' experience of work is also affected
   by being denied promotions (12 per cent) and having requests for
   training turned down and development opportunities denied (9 per
   cent). The allocation of tasks and work is also an issue, with 12 per
   cent of BME workers reporting being given harder or less popular work
   tasks, and one in ten saying they are not offered overtime. A similar
   proportion (9 per cent) say that they have not been given sufficient
   working hours.
     * [68]19[69]https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peoplein
       work/employmentandemployeetypes/datasets/labourmarketstatusbyethnic
       groupa09
     * [70]20Jobs monitor - the impact of the pandemic on BME employment,
       TUC (2022). Available at:
       [71]https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/jobs-monitor-i
       mpact-pa...
     * [72]21[73]https://hummedia.manchester.ac.uk/institutes/code/researc
       h/projects/racism-at-work/tuc-full-report.pdf

   6

   One focus group participant described how racism and xenophobia
   impacted them:

"She handed me the child's book and I said `no, don't give it to me. Give it
to the teaching assistant when she comes in,' and she didn't like that, and
she just flung the book at my face. I'm not one of those very, kind of loud
and aggressive people and so she felt that, 'oh she's just this little woman
from India, she hasn't got a British accent, she's qualified from overseas.'"

   Anti-immigrant sentiment often forms the basis of racist abuse facing
   BME workers. This does not exist in a vacuum. Indeed, in recent years
   we have been reminded time and time again, how decades of unrelenting
   immigration policies, nationality laws and media narratives have
   created and embedded a hostile environment for ethnic minority people
   in the UK.

Flexibility, care responsibilities and support for Disabled workers

   A core way in which the post-pandemic workplace is changing is the
   desire of many workers for more flexible forms of work - and our
   research shows BME workers are no exception. And of course, more
   flexible work has long been needed to support parents, especially
   women, and Disabled workers to remain in the labour market. TUC
   research has shown that there is a real appetite among workers for a
   range of flexible working options. Our research shows more than four
   out of five (82 per cent) workers in the UK want to work flexibly in
   the future, rising to 87 per cent amongst women workers.[74]22 Recent
   ONS data also noted how individuals reported the main advantage of
   homeworking being "an improvement to work-life balance".[75]23

   Our polling asked BME workers about their experience of flexible work
   and managing work alongside caring responsibilities.
     * 14 per cent of BME workers have had a request for flexible working
       refused.
     * 15 per cent of respondents said they had experienced difficulties
       managing work alongside childcare, and around 4 per cent said they
       have experienced being singled out for unfair treatment because of
       having children.
     * 5 per cent of BME workers have not received the support they needed
       for a disability, impairment, or health condition after illness.
     * A similar proportion (4 per cent) have not received the support
       needed to return to work after being off due to an impairment, or
       health condition.[76]24

     * [77]22[78]The future of flexible work | TUC
     * [79]23[80]Business and individual attitudes towards the future of
       homeworking, UK - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk)
     * [81]24 These figures are a percentage of all BME workers, rather
       than a percentage of those with childcare or caring
       responsibilities or Disabled workers.

   7

   Black workers are more likely to work in jobs and industries where
   access to home working is limited. That's why we must ensure fair
   access to all types of flexible working. Flexibility is not only home
   working but also includes winning shift predictability, flexible start
   and finish times, job-sharing and proper time off for caring
   responsibilities.

Insecure work

   BME workers are also more likely than White workers to be in insecure
   work. BME workers, especially BME women, are more likely to be employed
   on zero-hours contracts (ZHC).

   BME employees are also more likely than White employees to be employed
   on temporary contracts. 10.3 per cent of BME employees were in
   temporary employment in Q4 2021, compared to 5.5 per cent of White
   employees. This has grown over the past two years, from 7.9 per cent of
   BME employees and 4.8 per cent of White employees in Q4 2019.[82]25
     * [83]25 Ibid

   8

   Each year, the TUC estimates the number of people in insecure work.
   When estimating the number of people in insecure work the TUC includes:
     * those on zero-hours contracts
     * agency, casual and seasonal workers (but not those on fixed - term
       contracts)
     * the low-paid self-employed who miss out on key rights and
       protections that come with being an employee and cannot afford to
       provide a safety net for when they are unable to work.

   The most recent analysis found that BME workers are far more likely
   than White workers to be in insecure work.[84]26 Nearly one in six
   (15.7 per cent) BME men are likely to be in insecure work. 12.4 per
   cent of BME women are in the same position, and among employees
   (excluding the self-employed) BME women are the most likely group to be
   subjected to insecure work.

   Those in insecure work by gender and ethnicity
   Ethnicity Gender
             Male          Female        Total
   White     11.1 per cent 10.3 per cent 10.7 per cent
   BME       15.7 per cent 12.4 per cent 14.1 per cent

   60 per cent of all BME workers desire more hours of work compared to 30
   per cent who do not and 10 per cent who are unsure. This contrasts
   sharply with White workers of whom 49 per cent want to work more hours,
   against 42 per cent who do not. [85]27

"One of the worst things I think that has come out of this last 10 years'
austerity Conservative government is zero-hour contracts. And I feel like,
while it's suitable for some people, I feel like people should opt into it
rather than be forced."

   Throughout this report we have seen examples of coercive and repressive
   workplace practices which serve to silence and disadvantage BME
   workers. Moreover, the statistics in this section show that the
   economic circumstances in which BME workers find themselves prevent
   many workers from challenging workplace racism, which in turn helps to
   conceal the true nature and extent of the problem.

   There is an unequal relationship between employees and employers, with
   individual workers remaining reluctant to have conversations with their
   employers for fear that they may face retribution - such as a reduction
   in hours. This would be especially worrying for those on a zero, or
   low, hours contract. State systems may reinforce these unequal power
   dynamics. Previous TUC research has shown that the perceived lack of
   impartiality of the tribunal system continues to deter many ethnic
   minority workers from attempting to seek justice. [86]28

   This research reinforces how racism is fundamental in determining who
   gets hired, trained, promoted, retained, demoted, and dismissed. The
   evidence also further demonstrates that it is wrong to dismiss reports
   of racism in the workplace. Indeed, racism shapes the class position,
   class experience and class relations between workers and employers. It
   plays an important role in explaining why BME people are more likely to
   be stuck in low-paid, non-permanent, and low-hour jobs.

Working in a pandemic

   The social and economic uncertainty that many BME workers have faced
   since the 2008 crisis has been exacerbated by the Covid-19 pandemic.
   This can be seen in the differential death rates. ONS figures from 2020
   highlighted that Black African men had the highest rate of death
   involving Covid-19, at 2.7 times higher than men of White ethnic
   background. Black Caribbean women had the highest rate at two times
   higher than women of White ethnic background. [87]29

   Bangladeshi, Pakistani, and Indian men also had a significantly higher
   risk of death involving Covid-19 (1.5 and 1.6 times, respectively) than
   White men once region, population density, socio-demographic and
   household characteristics were accounted for. [88]30

   As the disproportionate death rate of BME people has become clearer, it
   has highlighted serious issues in our health, employment, and housing
   systems. Around one in six BME workers felt they had been put more at
   risk of exposure to Covid-19 because of their ethnic background. Many
   reported being forced to do frontline work that White colleagues had
   refused to do. Others said they were denied access to PPE equipment,
   refused risk assessments, and were singled out to do high risk work.
   [89]31

   Despite promises made to `build back better' and recognise the
   contribution of key workers, employment conditions have not improved
   for many of those whose contribution was applauded throughout the
   pandemic.

Challenges for BME workers during the pandemic

   The pandemic presented significant challenges for BME workers, who were
   more likely to be working from workplaces, and more likely to be key
   workers. A high proportion of key worker jobs in retail, transport,
   hospitality, social care, and health are made up of people from BME
   communities.[90]32

   BME workers are twice as likely to be nurses, security guards or bus
   drivers, and almost 50% more likely to be waiters or waitresses. In
   addition, Black workers are 40% more likely than their White
   counterparts to work in health and social care and account for 20% of
   all child social workers  in the UK. Not only is low pay prevalent in
   these sectors, but pay growth is incredibly poor in the public
   sector.[91]33

   Whether it's nursing the sick in hospitals, looking after the elderly
   in care homes, keeping public transport going or producing and
   distributing food, BME workers had to go out to work in all kinds of
   environments, with a higher risk of exposure to coronavirus.The growth
   ofcasualisedforms of work designed to circumvent employment rights has
   also increased the risks BME workers face.

   While many employers worked constructively with unions throughout the
   pandemic, others took the opportunity to abuse workers' rights, for
   example by deploying fire and rehire or failing to pay staff properly.
   These experiences were reflected in our focus group interviews.

"My financial situation drastically changed as well so I was barely able to
afford to eat sometimes. I let them know. Basically, they owed me money, my
workplace, and they said that the only way they're able to pay me is when
they go into the workplace, because they need to process stuff there."

   Previous TUC research revealed a failure of employers to conduct
   effective risk assessments. BME workers repeatedly highlighted both a
   failure to conduct risk assessments and, when they were carried out, a
   lack of acknowledgement of the increased risks for BME people that they
   identified.[92]34 BME workers working in workplaces through the
   pandemic felt that even if their workplaces were safe in themselves,
   travelling still presented risks of contracting the virus.

"I did feel a bit worried because I have four kids of my own... What if I'm
going to go into school and what if I contract it and then I'm bringing all
this back home as well?"

The legacy of pandemic working from home

   Although disproportionately high numbers of Black workers worked from
   workplaces during the pandemic, significant numbers had to work from
   home for extended periods, often for the first time. Several studies
   since the pandemic have revealed that, following their pandemic
   experience, most employees prefer working partially or totally from
   home. However, few studies have looked at BME workers specifically. We
   wanted to hear from BME workers about their experiences of working from
   home.

   When asked where they've mostly worked since the pandemic began, 36 per
   cent of BME workers said they'd been working somewhere other than their
   home and 44 per cent said they'd been working from home. 7 per cent
   said other, 4 per cent were unsure and 9 per cent said the question
   wasn't applicable either due to furlough or unemployment.

   Of those who mostly worked from home:
     * 58 per cent said the experience was positive compared to how they
       worked before the pandemic
     * A third (33 per cent) said the experience had been both positive
       and negative
     * Only 5 per cent said it had been negative

   Almost half (46 per cent) said they had been subjected to the same
   level of surveillance or scrutiny from their employer as before the
   pandemic. 19 per cent said the level had increased, whereas 22 per cent
   said it had decreased.

   When asked about preferences for long-term working arrangements, the
   vast majority of home workers (89 per cent) said they wanted to
   continue working from home for at least some of their working time.
     * Almost four-in-ten home workers (38 per cent) want to work from
       home all the time
     * A further 28 per cent want to split their working time evenly
       between home and a workplace
     * 23 per cent want some sort of other combination between working
       from home and working at a workplace
     * Only 5 per cent want a full return to working in an external
       workplace

   Harassment and racism still happen when BME workers are working from
   home, with a quarter (24 per cent) reporting they experienced
   harassment while working from home.

   The most common forms were:
     * Racist jokes or banter (7 per cent)
     * Being excluded from work related meetings or conversations (6 per
       cent)
     * Being bullied or harassed (5 per cent) and being made to feel
       uncomfortable at work (5 per cent)

   As we move towards more workplaces becoming `hybrid', 'a risk that
   inequalities entrench between those workers who do have positive
   flexible working rights and those who do not, with Black workers less
   likely to be afforded the former, with those who work from home having
   less contact with managers and executives, effectively `falling out of
   sight and out of mind'.

   The findings above reveal a clear preference among BME workers for
   employers to be more flexible - while ensuring that changed working
   patterns do not exacerbate inequalities. Moreover, it is unsurprising
   that racism continues, whether people are working remotely or in
   workplaces. Although increasing flexibility for workers is a positive
   step, it must not replace the urgent need to address racism in the
   workplace. Employers must take meaningful action to ensure the safety
   of their workers, whether they are working at home or in workplaces.

Tackling racism

   In the aftermath of the Black Lives Matter protests in 2020, many
   employers launched diversity and inclusion initiatives. Around half of
   BME employees said their employer had some form of strategy to tackle
   racism in the workplace. However, 22 per cent said their employer had
   nothing in place, and around a quarter (24 per cent) said they didn't
   know if their employer had anything in place.

   21 per cent reported their employer hosted diversity and inclusion
   events and a similar percentage said that their employer had an
   anti-racism strategy and/or action plan. Concerningly, only 13 per cent
   said that their employer collected race equality data. When asked about
   BME staff development programmes, only 10 per cent said their employer
   had this in place, and only 9% said their employer had targets to
   tackle the underrepresentation of BME staff.
     * [93]26 Jobs and recovery monitor - Insecure work, TUC (2021).
       Available at:
       [94]https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/jobs-and-recov
       ery-monitor-insecure-work
     * [95]27[96]https://www.tuc.org.uk/sites/default/files/2021-06/RotAre
       port.pdf
     * [97]28 [98]https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/lets-ta
       lk-about-racism-report
     * [99]29 [100]https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/bir
       thsdeathsandmarriages/deaths/articles/updatingethniccontrastsindeat
       hsinvolvingthecoronaviruscovid19englandandwales/deathsoccurring2mar
       chto28july2020
     * [101]30 [102]https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/bi
       rthsdeathsandmarriages/deaths/articles/coronaviruscovid19relateddea
       thsbyethnicgroupenglandandwales/2march2020to15may2020
     * [103]31 [104]https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/dying
       -job-racism-and-risk-work
     * [105]32 [106]https://commonslibrary.parliament.uk/coronavirus-which
       -key-workers-are-most-at-risk/
     * [107]33 TUC analysis of Employment by sector data retrieved from
       gov.uk in July 2022
     * [108]34 [109]https://www.tuc.org.uk/sites/default/files/2020-06/Dyi
       ng%20on%20the%20job%20final.pdf

   9

   When workplace race equality actions are in place, around 30-40 per
   cent of BME employees engage with them. Engagement is higher (40 per
   cent or more) with race equality pledges, the gathering of race
   equality data, anti-racism strategy and action plans, diversity and
   inclusion events, and BME staff development programmes.  For each
   action the majority of employees feel that it had a positive impact on
   their experience of the workplace as a BME worker.
   10

   It is clear from the research that significant numbers of employers are
   launching race equality actions and programmes. Whether or not these
   initiatives work remains to be seen. BME workers are rightly wary of
   tokenistic gestures, and more work needs to be done to ensure that
   impactful initiatives, with input from BME staff and subsequent robust
   evaluation, are introduced. Rather than employers taking part in
   box-ticking exercises that merely give the illusion that they are
   tackling racial inequality in the workplace, we need to see meaningful
   action.

   Itis important to note that discussing and challenging workplace racism
   often falls upon BME staff. This places a huge emotional burden on the
   shoulders of the people who are at the receiving end of this
   discrimination. Often BME workers are left having to manage and assuage
   the emotions of White people and the hostile responses they receive
   when trying to speak up and challenge workplace racism. Too many Black
   workers experience that their attempts to raise the question of racism
   with colleagues ends up with the behaviour of the complainant seen as
   the problem rather than the problem of workplace racism. Whatever our
   background, race or religion, workers are stronger together. Everybody
   benefits from anti-racism and fair treatment is everybody's
   responsibility.

What change is needed?

   We asked BME employees which policies and employer actions would
   improve things at work for BME people. There was no policy that was
   overwhelmingly popular or achieved even a majority of support. The most
   popular were:
     * Improving access to flexible working (32 per cent)
     * A new duty on employers to stop racism in the workplace (28 per
       cent)
     * Greater protections from unfair dismissal (27 per cent)
     * Removing names from job applications to stop bias from recruiting
       managers (27 per cent)
     * A pay rise for public sector workers (26 per cent)
     * Ethnicity pay gap reporting (26 per cent)

   11

   BME women were more likely than BME men to support many of these
   policies, such as improved access to flexible working, ethnicity pay
   gap reporting, an end to outsourcing, and a ban on zero-hours
   contracts. However, BME women were also slightly more likely to say
   that nothing needs to happen to improve things in the workplace for BME
   people.

   While no one policy gained a majority of support, it's clear that the
   majority of BME employees agree that something needs to be done. Only
   14 per cent of respondents said that nothing needs to happen to improve
   things for BME people in the workplace.

Conclusion and Recommendations

   The TUC Anti-Racism Taskforce commissioned this report to highlight the
   racism faced by BME workers in the labour market. There is an urgent
   need to effectively tackle racism and achieve a transformational change
   in workplace culture. This report gives a platform for the thousands of
   BME workers who have experienced racism at work to have their
   experiences revealed and recognised. It exposes the ongoing everyday
   reality of racism faced by many BME workers - and it demands a response
   from employers, government, and trade unions.

   Above everything, there must be a renewed urgency from everyone to
   tackle racism at work. Key to the change needed is one of mindset. Too
   often, racism is only seen as a problem when an individual incident is
   identified - such as when someone gets abused or treated differently
   because of their race. What is needed is instead a collective,
   pre-emptive response from all levels of government and employers that
   promotes equality and dignity for everyone, gives confidence to all
   staff that they need not stand for discrimination or bullying and makes
   dealing with racism at work everyone's responsibility.

Employers

   The TUC believes that this change cannot happen without transparency in
   the workplace. Employers need to collect the information to assess how
   institutional racism impacts their policy processes and practices. BME
   workers need to be confident to raise the problems they face within the
   workplace and that the experiences they relate will be heard and acted
   upon. Without this, the reality of racism in the workplace will
   continue to be hidden.

   Employers should:
     * Work with trade unions to establish a comprehensive ethnicity
       monitoring system covering ethnicity pay-gap reporting,
       recruitment, retention, promotion, pay and grading, access to
       training, performance management and discipline and grievance
       procedures.
     * Work with trade unions to establish targets and develop positive
       action measures to address racial inequalities within the
       workforce.
     * Ensure they have strong equality, diversity and dignity policy that
       explicitly includes zero tolerance of racism.
     * Make it clear that they will support all staff who raise concerns
       about racism and act to protect staff who are subject to racial
       abuse
     * Ensure there is a simple method for BME workers to report racism at
       work, and make sure that BME workers feel confident that complaints
       about racism will be taken seriously, acted on and dealt with
       satisfactorily.
     * Ensure that all staff know that workers who raise concerns about
       racism will not be victimised for doing so.

Government

   The TUC believes that the majority of measures considered by the
   current and past governments have concentrated on creating good
   practice in the public sector but have failed to recognise the need to
   encourage action in the private sector, which is the largest section of
   the labour market. Government policy on race relations and employment
   has mainly been aimed at creating good practice in the public sector on
   the premise that this will filter to the private sector.

   The TUC believes this is a false premise and that if race equality in
   employment is to be achieved, then discriminatory practice in the
   private sector, which makes up two-thirds of the labour market, must be
   tackled. The TUC believes that government needs to have a strong
   and coherent legal framework that directly addresses the race
   discrimination experienced by BME communities in the labour market and
   broader society.

   We call on government to adequately fund the EHRC as an independent
   monitoring body to address the alarming and deeply entrenched racism
   uncovered in this report. The EHRC and government must work together to
   ensure the implementation of recommendations outlined and follow this
   up with an annual mandatory report to Parliament on progress made.

   The Government should:

   Ensure that the workers at the sharp end of structural racism get a
   better deal. As outlined above, Black workers are significantly more
   likely to experience insecure and poor-quality work. Raising the floor
   of rights for everyone will have a disproportionate impact on these
   workers and make it harder for employers to operate a two-tier
   workforce. To achieve this government should:
     * Reform the rules on employment status to ensure that all workers
       benefit from the same employment rights, including statutory
       redundancy pay, protection from unfair dismissal, family-friendly
       rights, sick pay and rights to flexible working. To this end,
       employment status law should be modernised, putting an end to the
       current two-tier workforce.
     * Ban the regular use of zero-hours contracts, and ensure all workers
       receive adequate notice of shifts, and compensation when shifts are
       cancelled at short notice.
     * We need to give workers stronger rights to speak with one voice and
       bargain with their employer and give unions access to workplaces to
       tell workers about the benefits of union membership, following the
       New Zealand model.
     * And starting in sectors that are characterised by low pay and poor
       conditions, we need to create new bodies for workers and employers
       to come together to set minimum standards and Fair Pay Agreements
       across the sector, starting with social care.

    Ensure that employers have a duty to embed race equality practices in
   their workplaces. Employers are responsible for taking corrective and
   preventative action. They must ensure that they take measurable steps
   to prevent situations in which their employees are at risk of
   encountering racism. To achieve this, government should:
     * Change the law to make employers responsible for protecting their
       workers against racism by third parties, such as clients,
       contractors, and customers.
     * Introduce race equality requirements into public sector contracts
       for the supply of goods and services, to incentivise companies to
       improve their race equality policies and practices, minimise the
       use of zero-hours, temporary and agency contracts, and promote
       permanent employment. Companies that do not meet the requirements
       should not be awarded a public contract.
     * Legislate to make private sector companies responsible for
       promoting equal treatment throughout their activities, just as
       public sector organisations already are.
     * Remove names from job applications to stop bias from recruiting
       managers.

   Ensure that there are swift and effective penalties when workers
   experience racism.  Everyone deserves to be treated with respect and
   dignity at work. All forms of alleged harassment and bullying must be
   dealt with seriously and swiftly. To achieve this, government should:
     * Re-introduce third-party harassment provisions (section 40 of the
       Equality Act 2010) to enable BME workers to seek remedy where they
       have been subject to third-party harassment.
     * Reinstate the power for employment tribunals to make broader
       recommendations.
     * Reinstate the statutory discrimination questionnaires to enable BME
       workers to seek information from their employer about potential
       discriminatory actions.
     * Enact Section 14 of the Equality Act 2010 to allow applications of
       dual discrimination to be heard by employment tribunals.

Enforcement

   The TUC believes that an independent Equality and Human Rights
   Commission (EHRC) with strong promotion and enforcement powers is
   fundamental to challenging racial discrimination in the labour market
   and the wider community.

   We remain concerned that the relationship between the EHRC and its
   sponsoring departments has seriously undermined the EHRC's role as an
   independent body that can challenge and advise the government on race
   equality matters. The Equality Act 2006, Part 4, s.42 (3) states that
   `the Minister shall have regard to the desirability of ensuring that
   the Commission is under as few constraints as reasonably possible in
   determining its activities, its timetables, and its priorities'. The
   TUC believes that the EHRC is subject to inappropriate political
   pressure and that the considerable reductions in the EHRC's budget have
   undermined its ability to carry out its role.

   To ensure effective independent enforcement:
     * The government should transfer responsibility for the EHRC from the
       Secretary of State to Parliament, through the Justice and Human
       Rights Commission or Women and Equalities Committee to ensure its
       independence from government.
     * Ensure the Equalities and Human Rights Commission has enough
       funding to promote workplace anti-racist policies and practices and
       take more legal cases to make sure the law reflects the nature of
       contemporary racism.

Trade unions

   Unions have an important role to play in ensuring that BME workers have
   a strong and effective voice at work, and it is crucial that trade
   unions engage with employers to tackle policies and practices that
   perpetuate institutional racism in the workplace. To achieve this,
   trade unions need to:
     * Improve training for trade union reps to enable them to identify
       and effectively tackle racism in the workplace.
     * Work with employers to establish a comprehensive ethnic monitoring
       system covering ethnicity pay-gap reporting, recruitment,
       retention, promotion, pay and grading, access to training,
       performance management and discipline and grievance procedures.
     * Work with employers to develop action plans that address racial
       disparities in their workplaces.
     * Work to improve the confidence of BME members in our ability to
       represent them on all matters, including tackling racism at work.

Support and information

Trade unions

   To find out more about trade unions and which is the best for you go to
   [110]www.tuc.org.uk/join-a-union

Advisory Conciliation and Arbitration Service (Acas)

   Acas gives employees and employers free, impartial advice on workplace
   rights, rules, and best practice: [111]The law on race discrimination:
   Race discrimination at work - Acas

CIPD

   The professional body for HR and people development: [112]Tackling
   racism in the workplace | CIPD

Citizens Advice

   Citizens Advice offer confidential advice online, over the phone, and
   in person, for free: [113]Race discrimination - Citizens Advice

Equality and Human Rights Commission

   This is the UK's national equality body established by the Equality Act
   2006: [114]Race discrimination | Equality and Human Rights Commission
   (equalityhumanrights.com)

Equality Advisory and Support Service

   The Helpline advises and assists individuals on issues relating
   to equality and human rights, across England, Scotland and Wales:
   [115]Equality Advisory and Support Service

National Bullying Helpline

   The National Bullying Helpline has over 20 years' experience helping
   employees and businesses with bullying in the workplace:
   [116]https://www.nationalbullyinghelpline.co.uk/

Stop Hate UK

   Stop Hate UK provides independent, confidential and accessible
   reporting and support for victims, witnesses and third parties:
   [117]http://www.stophateuk.org/
   Download PDF
   PDF | 715.58 KB

Stay Updated

   Want to hear about our latest news and blogs?
   Sign up now to get it straight to your inbox
   Search the site*
   ____________________________________________________________
   Sign up
   Leave this field blank ____________________

Stay Updated

   Want to hear about our latest news and blogs?
   Sign up now to get it straight to your inbox
   Search the site*
   ____________________________________________________________
   Sign up
   Leave this field blank ____________________
   Related
   content
   Campaigns
   Banner
   TUC Anti-Racism Taskforce
   The Taskforce will lead the trade union movement's renewed campaign
   against racism at work. It will engage with Black workers across the UK
   to hear about their experiences. And it will produce recommendations on
   tackling structural racism in the UK, in workplaces and in unions
   themselves.

   [118]Join a union

   Trades Union Congress
   Congress House,
   Great Russell Street
   London WC1B 3LS
   View on map
   T. 020 7636 4030
   E. info@tuc.org.uk
   Contact
   TUC near you

   London, East & South East
   Midlands
   Northern
   North West
   South West
   Yorkshire & the Humber

   Wales TUC
   TUC in Scotland
   Find out about...

   Rep guidance
   Info for researchers
   Jobs
   Join us on social media

   Stay in touch
   Stay up to date with the TUC and get the latest news, reports and
   regional information. Join our mailing list
   Search the site*
   ____________________________________________________________
   (BUTTON)
   Leave this field blank ____________________

   © Trades Union Congress 2023, unless otherwise stated

   [119]Accessibility and website terms
   [120]Privacy policy
   [121]Cookies policy
   [122]Site map

   Enable Two-Factor Authentication

   To access the admin area, you will need to setup two-factor
   authentication (TFA).
   Setup now

References

   Visible links:
   1. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market
   2. https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-KSRWLQ
   3. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#skipTo
   4. https://www.tuc.org.uk/high-contrast/enable?destination=/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market
   5. https://www.tuc.org.uk/searchsite?sa=1&so=1
   6. https://www.tuc.org.uk/
   7. https://www.tuc.org.uk/national/about-tuc
   8. https://www.tuc.org.uk/news?field_news_type=1
   9. https://www.tuc.org.uk/blogs
  10. https://www.tuc.org.uk/events
  11. https://www.tuc.org.uk/publications
  12. https://www.tuc.org.uk/contact-tuc
  13. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#about-unions
  14. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#campaigns
  15. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#research-analysis
  16. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#workplace-guidance
  17. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#training
  18. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis
  19. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote1_9mxr4bi
  20. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref1_9mxr4bi
  21. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote2_5eier77
  22. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote3_nw7w0g1
  23. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote4_rfsy90a
  24. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote5_7oaxp0l
  25. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote6_5eiiw5q
  26. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote7_k9t5j0s
  27. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref2_5eier77
  28. https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/277111/4262.pdf
  29. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref3_nw7w0g1
  30. https://commonslibrary.parliament.uk/income-inequality-by-ethnic-group/
  31. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref4_rfsy90a
  32. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/dying-job-racism-and-risk-work
  33. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref5_7oaxp0l
  34. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref6_5eiiw5q
  35. https://hummedia.manchester.ac.uk/institutes/code/research/projects/racism-at-work/tuc-full-report.pdf
  36. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref7_k9t5j0s
  37. https://www.tuc.org.uk/sites/default/files/2022-07/InsecureWork.pdf
  38. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote8_ineokpg
  39. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref8_ineokpg
  40. https://gbr01.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.ons.gov.uk%2Femploymentandlabourmarket%2Fpeopleinwork%2Femploymentandemployeetypes%2Fdatasets%2Flabourmarketstatusbyethnicgroupa09&data=05%7C01%7CSKaur%40tuc.org.uk%7C7b8c7796b5cf4b263ca608da7ec7145e%7Caa678729a27343f196a8fbaf0bd6d5a0%7C1%7C0%7C637961690746404207%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C3000%7C%7C%7C&sdata=Wk2s%2FocIQ1WqlzvhTtCBRmSXhnAMZnPcv4Pj9rfTLik%3D&reserved=0
  41. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote9_dzz5aw8
  42. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote10_nz9pu6k
  43. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote11_n0pfdct
  44. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref9_dzz5aw8
  45. https://www.fawcettsociety.org.uk/news/landmark-report-reveals-75-of-women-of-colour-have-experienced-racism-at-work
  46. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref10_nz9pu6k
  47. https://commonslibrary.parliament.uk/income-inequality-by-ethnic-group/
  48. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref11_n0pfdct
  49. https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/employmentandemployeetypes/datasets/labourmarketstatusbyethnicgroupa09
  50. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote12_dteip2z
  51. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote13_tb1ycb4
  52. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref12_dteip2z
  53. https://www.fawcettsociety.org.uk/broken-ladders
  54. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref13_tb1ycb4
  55. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote14_ms0qj3n
  56. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote15_fplneil
  57. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote17_7em7o1y
  58. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote18_ptxmhux
  59. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref14_ms0qj3n
  60. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/pay-working-class-jobs
  61. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref15_fplneil
  62. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref17_7em7o1y
  63. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref18_ptxmhux
  64. https://gbr01.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.tuc.org.uk%2Fresearch-analysis%2Freports%2Fjobs-monitor-impact-pandemic-bme-employment&data=05%7C01%7CSKaur%40tuc.org.uk%7Ccbfeaaff27824045fc5f08da8135be16%7Caa678729a27343f196a8fbaf0bd6d5a0%7C1%7C0%7C637964365105637846%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C3000%7C%7C%7C&sdata=0SgSJCHztVC%2FBQ6GLx%2Bw5XL9vuomfzqP%2BnKRO%2FB5mwk%3D&reserved=0
  65. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote19_oh9dubw
  66. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote20_f9qhtab
  67. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote21_p58ew13
  68. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref19_oh9dubw
  69. https://gbr01.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.ons.gov.uk%2Femploymentandlabourmarket%2Fpeopleinwork%2Femploymentandemployeetypes%2Fdatasets%2Flabourmarketstatusbyethnicgroupa09&data=05%7C01%7CSKaur%40tuc.org.uk%7Ccbfeaaff27824045fc5f08da8135be16%7Caa678729a27343f196a8fbaf0bd6d5a0%7C1%7C0%7C637964365105637846%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C3000%7C%7C%7C&sdata=5mFsvgf3v1CHKnBaVKqh2aX7Rsdv%2FxujqwVvHCmzExk%3D&reserved=0
  70. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref20_f9qhtab
  71. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/jobs-monitor-impact-pandemic-bme-employment
  72. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref21_p58ew13
  73. https://hummedia.manchester.ac.uk/institutes/code/research/projects/racism-at-work/tuc-full-report.pdf
  74. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote22_psz1ogl
  75. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote23_jl9n5tp
  76. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote24_76dj1nr
  77. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref22_psz1ogl
  78. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/future-flexible-work
  79. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref23_jl9n5tp
  80. https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/employmentandemployeetypes/articles/businessandindividualattitudestowardsthefutureofhomeworkinguk/apriltomay2021#perceptions-of-homeworking
  81. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref24_76dj1nr
  82. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote25_ucr04r8
  83. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref25_ucr04r8
  84. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote26_7pt5exw
  85. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote27_fbs6b5h
  86. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote28_1fpj16i
  87. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote29_t3rk8gd
  88. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote30_759blyx
  89. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote31_8ws7el7
  90. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote32_x9hqjnb
  91. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote33_wsr9y9f
  92. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnote34_2rlno1x
  93. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref26_7pt5exw
  94. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/jobs-and-recovery-monitor-insecure-work
  95. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref27_fbs6b5h
  96. https://www.tuc.org.uk/sites/default/files/2021-06/RotAreport.pdf
  97. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref28_1fpj16i
  98. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/lets-talk-about-racism-report
  99. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref29_t3rk8gd
 100. https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/deaths/articles/updatingethniccontrastsindeathsinvolvingthecoronaviruscovid19englandandwales/deathsoccurring2marchto28july2020
 101. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref30_759blyx
 102. https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/deaths/articles/coronaviruscovid19relateddeathsbyethnicgroupenglandandwales/2march2020to15may2020
 103. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref31_8ws7el7
 104. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/dying-job-racism-and-risk-work
 105. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref32_x9hqjnb
 106. https://commonslibrary.parliament.uk/coronavirus-which-key-workers-are-most-at-risk/
 107. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref33_wsr9y9f
 108. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#footnoteref34_2rlno1x
 109. https://www.tuc.org.uk/sites/default/files/2020-06/Dying%20on%20the%20job%20final.pdf
 110. http://www.tuc.org.uk/join-a-union
 111. https://www.acas.org.uk/race-discrimination
 112. https://www.cipd.co.uk/knowledge/tackling-racism-workplace
 113. https://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/law-and-courts/discrimination/protected-characteristics/race-discrimination/
 114. https://www.equalityhumanrights.com/en/advice-and-guidance/race-discrimination
 115. https://www.equalityadvisoryservice.com/
 116. https://www.nationalbullyinghelpline.co.uk/
 117. http://www.stophateuk.org/
 118. https://www.tuc.org.uk/find-union-you
 119. https://www.tuc.org.uk/website-accessibility-and-terms
 120. https://www.tuc.org.uk/tuc-privacy-notice
 121. https://www.tuc.org.uk/cookies-policy
 122. https://www.tuc.org.uk/site-map

   Hidden links:
 124. https://www.tuc.org.uk/
 125. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#app__search
 126. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#app__search
 127. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#app__nav
 128. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#about-unions
 129. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#campaigns
 130. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#research-analysis
 131. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#workplace-guidance
 132. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market#training
 133. https://www.tuc.org.uk/national/about-tuc
 134. https://www.tuc.org.uk/news?field_news_type=1
 135. https://www.tuc.org.uk/blogs
 136. https://www.tuc.org.uk/events
 137. https://www.tuc.org.uk/publications
 138. https://www.tuc.org.uk/contact-tuc
 139. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market
 140. https://www.tuc.org.uk/about-unions
 141. https://www.tuc.org.uk/why-join-union
 142. https://www.tuc.org.uk/join-union
 143. https://www.tuc.org.uk/why-join-union
 144. https://www.tuc.org.uk/joinunion
 145. http://www.tuc.org.uk/unions
 146. https://www.tuc.org.uk/how-unions-work
 147. https://www.tuc.org.uk/how-tuc-works-unions
 148. https://www.tuc.org.uk/solidarity-hub/resources-unions-dispute
 149. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market
 150. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis
 151. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/raising-pay-everyone
 152. https://www.tuc.org.uk/reports
 153. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/global-solidarity
 154. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/health-and-safety
 155. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/industrial-strategy
 156. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/pensions-and-benefits
 157. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/public-services-and-transport
 158. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/corporate-governance-and-responsibility
 159. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/economy-jobs-and-pay
 160. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/equality
 161. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/rights-work
 162. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/union-organising
 163. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/work-and-technology
 164. https://www.tuc.org.uk/people
 165. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis/reports/still-rigged-racism-uk-labour-market
 166. https://www.tuc.org.uk/workplace-guidance
 167. https://www.tuc.org.uk/union-reps
 168. https://www.tuc.org.uk/resource/covid-19-coronavirus-guidance-unions
 169. https://www.tuc.org.uk/workplace-guidance/basic-rights-and-contracts
 170. https://www.tuc.org.uk/workplace-guidance/dismissal-redundancy-and-grievance
 171. https://www.tuc.org.uk/workplace-guidance/equality-and-discrimination
 172. https://www.tuc.org.uk/workplace-guidance/family-friendly-work
 173. https://www.tuc.org.uk/workplace-guidance/health-safety-and-wellbeing
 174. https://www.tuc.org.uk/workplace-guidance/learning-skills-and-training
 175. https://www.tuc.org.uk/workplace-guidance/organising-and-bargaining
 176. https://www.tuc.org.uk/workplace-guidance/pay-holiday-and-working-hours
 177. https://www.tuc.org.uk/union-reps
 178. https://www.tuc.org.uk/
 179. https://www.tuc.org.uk/sites/default/files/2022-08/RacismintheUKlabourmarket.pdf
 180. https://www.tuc.org.uk/AntiRacismTaskforce
 181. https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/Congress+House,+23-28+Great+Russell+St,+Fitzrovia,+London+WC1B+3LW/@51.5171579,-0.1311268,17z/data=!3m1!4b1!4m5!3m4!1s0x48761b3288a86c13:0x842c9e6ab5e3f175!8m2!3d51.5171546!4d-0.1289381?hl=en
 182. https://www.tuc.org.uk/contact-tuc
 183. https://www.tuc.org.uk/LESE
 184. https://www.tuc.org.uk/midlands
 185. https://www.tuc.org.uk/northern
 186. https://www.tuc.org.uk/north-west
 187. https://www.tuc.org.uk/south-west
 188. https://www.tuc.org.uk/yorkshire-and-the-humber
 189. https://www.tuc.org.uk/wales
 190. https://www.tuc.org.uk/scotland
 191. https://www.tuc.org.uk/union-reps
 192. https://www.tuc.org.uk/research-analysis
 193. https://www.tuc.org.uk/jobs
 194. http://www.facebook.com/tradesunioncongress
 195. https://twitter.com/the_tuc
 196. https://www.instagram.com/tradesunioncongress/
 197. https://www.tiktok.com/@tradesunioncongress/
