   anti-racist opening, he pivoted to the consensus racist theory of the
   "pervasive achievement gap", to the disproven racist theory of "the
   erosion of black families" that "welfare policies ... may have
   worsened", and to the unproven racist theory that racial discrimination
   had bequeathed blacks a "legacy of defeat". According to Obama, this
   "legacy of defeat" explained why "young men and, increasingly, young
   women" were "standing on street corners or languishing in our prisons".
--
   defeat". Obama did not offer any childrearing or psychological lessons
   for the presumably parentally and psychologically superior white
   Americans. He merely asked them to join him on the "long march" against
   racial discrimination - "not just with words but with deeds". He left
   the Philadelphia platform on 18 March 2008, as he began, expressing the
   half-truthful analogy of continuous racial progression. "This union may
   never be perfect," he said, "but generation after generation has shown
--
   eradicated, are not eradicating, and will not eradicate racist ideas,
   let alone racist policies. Power will never sacrifice self-interest,
   cannot be educated away from its self-interest. Those who have the
   power to abolish racial discrimination have not done so thus far, and
   they will never do so as long as racism benefits them in some way.
   Activist Angela Davis, who cast her first-ever vote for a major
   political party in supporting Obama in 2008.
--
   been a never-ending affair in America. That's why education will never
   bring into being an anti-racist America.

   To undermine racial discrimination, Americans must focus their efforts
   on those who have the power to undermine racial discrimination. History
   has shown that those Americans who have had the power to undermine
   racial discrimination have rarely done so. They have done so, however,
   when they realised that eliminating some form of racial discrimination
   was in their interest, much as Abraham Lincoln chose to end slavery to
   save the union. They have also conceded to anti-racist change as a
   better alternative than the disruptive, disordered, politically harmful
--
   demands are met.

   But protesting against racist policies can never be a long-term
   solution to eradicating racial discrimination in America. Just as one
   generation of powerful Americans could decide or be pressured by
   protest to end racial discrimination, when the conditions and interests
   change, another generation could once again encourage racial
   discrimination. That's why protesting against racist power has been a
   never-ending affair in America.
