Guterres

   (BUTTON) Play video
   People march against racial discrimination in North Carolina, USA.
   © UNSPLASH/Clay Banks
   People march against racial discrimination in North Carolina, USA.

   [65]Facebook [66]Twitter [67]Print [68]Email

--

   Racism continues to poison institutions, social structures &amp;
   everyday life in every society.Realizing the vision of a world free of
   racism &amp; racial discrimination demands action every day, at every
   level, in every society. pic.twitter.com/IK12F99X47
   António Guterres, UN Secretary-General
   antonioguterres
--
   contribute to the success of our United Nations," he stated

   Action every day, at every level, in every society is demanded to
   achieve a world free of racism and racial discrimination.
   "Let us unite around our common humanity and speak as one for equality,
   respect, justice and dignity for all," concluded the UN chief.

--
A goal not realized

   Since the day was established more than half a century ago, the
   elimination of racial discrimination has continued to elude us, Mr.
   Shahid reminded the participants.

   Despite that the International Convention has reached near universal
   ratification, he observed, "we continue to see an increase in hate
   speech, intolerance, and racism, especially against minorities."

   "Our moral failure to eliminate racial discrimination is a failure
   against everything we stand for in the Hall of this Assembly", he
   declared.

`Overt stereotyping'

   The Assembly President drew attention to the long-lasting consequences
   of racial discrimination, noting that the COVID pandemic has served to
   exacerbate underlying and long-standing inequalities that plague
   societies at large, including racism, racial discrimination,
   xenophobia, and other forms of intolerance.

   Many marginalized and vulnerable people have lost decades of precious
--

   Going forward, he encouraged national governments, civil society
   organizations, and the private sector to "work together to eliminate
   racial discrimination."
   cD Receive daily updates directly in your inbox - [79]Subscribe here to
   a topic.
   cD Download the UN News app for your [80]iOS or [81]Android devices.
--

   She is outspoken, candid, and speaks truth to power. She is known to
   lecture governments and tell them how to improve their track record on
   xenophobia, racism, racial discrimination, and all forms of
   intolerance.

Resources
