   #American Civil Liberties Union » Mandela Faced the "Goliath" of Racial
   Discrimination Comments Feed alternate alternate alternate alternate

   Skip navigation
   Back to News & Commentary

Mandela Faced the "Goliath" of Racial Discrimination

   Dennis Parker,
   Director,
   ACLU Racial Justice Program
   Share This Page
   December 6, 2013

   Nelson Mandela’s life is a rebuke to oppression and to those who would
   respond with frustrated resignation or hatred. It is difficult to
   imagine a more unlikely success story against seemingly impossible
   odds. South Africa’s system of apartheid seemed like the purest
   manifestation of racial discrimination possible. The fact that the
   discrimination was perpetrated by a small minority of whites against a
   majority of blacks in their own native land dictated that the means of
   maintaining the cruel racial hierarchy be extreme and pervasive. That
   the principal actor in the destruction of this unjust system would be
   an activist sentenced to life imprisonment in South Africa’s notorious
   Robben Island is nearly miraculous.

   The ferocious injustice in South Africa could only yield to a movement
   led by a person of extraordinary character. Nelson Mandela was such a
   person. Combining an undying intolerance of inequality and a steely
   determination with warmth, a sense of humor, forgiveness and an almost
   other-worldly grace, Mandela led the negotiations that allowed for a
   peaceful transition to a government which, for the first time, included
   all South Africans. Predictions of violent retribution for the previous
   injustice proved unfounded. Full retribution for prior abuses would be
   difficult, if not impossible, but Mandela’s insistence on a process of
   truth and reconciliation and his personal example of forgiveness for
   the people who had brutalized him and his colleagues permitted the
   country to move forward while permitting the horrid stories of the era
   of apartheid to be aired.

   I had the opportunity to experience firsthand the enormous scope of
   changes that have occurred in South Africa. Shortly after the end of
   Mr. Mandela’s first term, I, along with a team of other civil rights
   attorneys, travelled to South Africa to share our experience regarding
   attempts to further civil and human rights. We quickly learned that the
   South African Constitution’s protections of basic civil rights were far
   more extensive than our own and that this broad scope reflected the
   broad, pioneering vision of fairness and inclusiveness advocated so
   effectively by Mr. Mandela.

   Through his efforts, Mandela became a leader not only of his country
   but of the world. Any expectations that all of South Africa’s racial
   and economic difficulties could be completely solved in a relatively
   short period of time are unrealistic. But Mandela’s accomplishments
   during that short period created a legacy that will be difficult to
   match. It is hard to imagine any individual who will be able to capture
   the imagination of the entire world and make such an enormous
   difference in the lives of his people. But as we individually face the
   seemingly intractable effects of persistent discrimination all over the
   world, it would be good to remember this man who, like a modern David,
   faced the Goliath of discrimination and oppression and changed the
   world.

   Learn more about racial discrimination and other civil liberty issues:
   Sign up for breaking news alerts, follow us on Twitter, and like us on
   Facebook.

More in Human Rights

   A waving rainbow flag reading "Rest In Power Daniel Aston" sits at the
   memorial created outside of Club Q.
   The Club Q Shooting Took Trans Lives and Destabilized a Community
   The Club Q Shooting Took Trans Lives and Destabilized a Community
   A compelation photo of the TPS holders.
   The US Government Gave Them Protection. Now It May Take It Away.
   The US Government Gave Them Protection. Now It May Take It Away.
   The U.S.-Mexico border.
   Five Things to Know About the Right to Seek Asylum
   Five Things to Know About the Right to Seek Asylum
   With helmets, gas masks and armed with shotguns, state police overlook
   the Attica prison yard which is filled with prisoners, face down in mud
   with their hands behind their heads. Other policemen are in orange
   ponchos are walking and searching the prisoners in Sept. 1971.
   50 Years of Fighting for the Rights of Incarcerated People
   50 Years of Fighting for the Rights of Incarcerated People
