   #alternate alternate alternate Elon Musk Left a South Africa That Was
   Rife With Misinformation and White Privilege

   Africa|Elon Musk Left a South Africa That Was Rife With Misinformation
   and White Privilege
   https://www.nytimes.com/2022/05/05/world/africa/elon-musk-south-africa.
   html
     * (BUTTON) Give this articleGive this articleGive this article
     * (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON)
     * 264

   Elon Musk, in a photo from the 1985 Bryanston High School yearbook.
   Elon Musk, in a photo from the 1985 Bryanston High School
   yearbook.Credit...Bryanston High School Yearbook

   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON) SectionsSkip to contentSkip to site index

Elon Musk Left a South Africa That Was Rife With Misinformation and White
Privilege

   The apartheid era created all-white enclaves littered with anti-Black
   government propaganda and sheltered from the atrocities of apartheid.

   Elon Musk, in a photo from the 1985 Bryanston High School
   yearbook.Credit...Bryanston High School Yearbook

   Supported by
   Continue reading the main story
     * Send any friend a story
       As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month.
       Anyone can read what you share.
       (BUTTON)
       (BUTTON) Give this articleGive this articleGive this article
     * (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON)
     * 264

   John Eligon Lynsey Chutel

   By John Eligon and Lynsey Chutel

   John Eligon and Lynsey Chutel interviewed 13 acquaintances or family
   members of Elon Musk over the course of five days, reporting from
   Johannesburg and Pretoria.
     * Published May 5, 2022Updated May 11, 2022

   Leer en español

Listen to This Article

   To hear more audio stories from publications like The New York Times,
   download Audm for iPhone or Android.

   Elon Musk’s impending takeover of Twitter has many people probing his
   public statements and his past for clues about how he will shape one of
   the world’s most influential public platforms.

   But Mr. Musk, best known for owning the companies Tesla and SpaceX, has
   not talked much in public about a significant swath of his past: How
   growing up as a white person under the racist apartheid system in South
   Africa may have shaped him.

   “It’s telling — white kids were insulated from the harsh reality of
   it,” said Terence Beney, who is white and graduated with Mr. Musk from
   Pretoria Boys High School in 1988.

   Interviews with relatives and former classmates reveal an upbringing in
   elite, segregated white communities that were littered with anti-Black
   government propaganda, and detached from the atrocities that white
   political leaders inflicted on the Black majority.

   Mr. Musk, 50, grew up in the economic hub of Johannesburg, the
   executive capital of Pretoria and the coastal city of Durban. His
   suburban communities were largely shrouded in misinformation.
   Newspapers sometimes arrived on doorsteps with whole sections blacked
   out, and nightly news bulletins ended with the national anthem and an
   image of the national flag flapping as the names of white young men who
   were killed fighting for the government scrolled on the screen.

   “We were really clueless as white South African teenagers. Really
   clueless,” said Melanie Cheary, a classmate of Mr. Musk’s during the
   two years he spent at Bryanston High School in the northern suburbs of
   Johannesburg, where Black people were rarely seen other than in service
   of white families living in palatial homes.

   Mr. Musk left South Africa shortly after graduation at 17 to go to
   college in Canada, barely ever looking back. He did not respond to
   emails requesting comment about his childhood.

   Mr. Musk has heralded his purchase of Twitter as a victory for free
   speech, having criticized the platform for removing posts and banning
   users. It is unclear what role his childhood — coming up in a time and
   place in which there was hardly a free exchange of ideas and where
   government misinformation was used to demonize Black South Africans —
   may have played in that decision.

   Classmates at two high schools he attended described him as a loner
   with no close friends. None offered recollections of things he said or
   did that revealed his views on the politics of the time. But Black
   schoolmates recall that he spent time with Black friends.

   Image Pretoria Boys High School, from which Elon Musk graduated,
   leaving soon after to attend college in Canada.
   Pretoria Boys High School, from which Elon Musk graduated, leaving soon
   after to attend college in Canada.Credit...Joao Silva/The New York
   Times

   Mr. Musk’s father, Errol Musk, said in an interview with The New York
   Times that Elon, his brother and sister were aware from a young age
   that there was something wrong with the apartheid system. Errol, who
   was elected to the Pretoria City Council in 1972, said they would ask
   him about the laws prohibiting Black people from patronizing
   restaurants, movie theaters and beaches. They had to make calculations
   when they were going out with nonwhite friends about what they could
   safely do, he said.

   “As far as being sheltered from it, that’s nonsense. They were
   confronted by it every day,” recalled Errol, who said he belonged to
   the anti-apartheid Progressive Party. He added, “They didn’t like it.”

   Still, Errol offered a description of their lives that underscored how
   removed they were from the country’s violent reality. They got along
   well with Black people, he said, pointing to his children’s good
   relationship with their domestic staff, and he described life in South
   Africa during apartheid as being mostly better and safer than it is
   now.

   According to a biography of Mr. Musk, written by Ashlee Vance, Mr. Musk
   said he did not want to partake in South Africa’s mandatory military
   service because it would have forced him to participate in the
   apartheid regime — and that may have contributed to his decision to
   leave South Africa shortly after high school graduation.

   The apartheid system created a distinction among white people,
   specifically between those who spoke Afrikaans and those who spoke
   English, like Mr. Musk’s family. While political power lay with the
   Afrikaners — the perfecters of apartheid who descended from Dutch,
   German and French settlers — English-speaking white South Africans
   enjoyed wealth that felt to some like a birthright, Ms. Cheary said.

   “We were the white, English-speaking elite of the world,” she said. “It
   was literally our kingdom.”

   Pretoria Boys had a socially progressive undercurrent. The school’s
   headmaster had participated in freedom struggle activities; some
   students would travel to anti-apartheid gatherings.

   “I’m pretty confident in saying that at a place like Pretoria Boys
   High, you were exposed to progressive ideas, even if you didn’t adopt
   them,” said Mr. Beney, 51, who does policy work for public health and
   social welfare organizations.

   Yet none of them experienced the beatings and gunshots of state
   security forces like the Black children who were fighting for basic
   rights in township schools. And many students bought into government
   propaganda, Mr. Beney said.

   Image
   Terence Beney, who graduated with Mr. Musk from Pretoria Boys High, in
   a hallway of the school. Credit...Joao Silva/The New York Times

   He recalled a debate in one of his classes at Pretoria Boys in the
   mid-1980s over the government’s requirement that they serve in the
   military, squashing efforts by Black South Africans to defeat an
   oppressive regime.

   A slight few said they would refuse to kill on behalf of an unjust
   political system. But others said that while apartheid had its
   injustices, the country was in an all-out war. Some insisted that the
   fight was to protect against communists. Others justified the battle by
   arguing that Black people were susceptible to evil ideas.

   Another common trope among students back then, Mr. Beney said, was that
   Black people could not be trusted with the right to vote because they
   had no tradition of democracy.

   The apartheid system had forced the Black majority to live in certain
   areas. The way that was taught in school was that the country was made
   up of many tribes, with some opting for independence in their own
   homelands, according to Stanley Netshituka, who became the first Black
   student at Pretoria Boys in 1981.

   Mr. Netshituka said he had some friends from liberal families who
   understood how bad things were for Black South Africans. But they were
   the exception, he said.

   “I would say the majority were blissfully ignorant and happy to be
   blissfully ignorant,” said Mr. Netshituka, 54, who was allowed to
   attend the school because his father was a diplomat for Venda, one of
   the ethnic homelands in South Africa that was considered a
   semi-independent nation at the time.

   In the same breath, classmates would call Black freedom fighters
   terrorists but tell him that, “Not all Black people are necessarily bad
   because I can see you’re not so bad,” he recalled.

   Mr. Musk became friends with a cousin of Mr. Netshituka’s, Asher
   Mashudu, according to Mr. Mashudu’s brother, Nyadzani Ranwashe. One
   time at lunch, a white student used an anti-Black slur, and Mr. Musk
   chided the student, but then got bullied for doing so, Mr. Ranwashe
   said.

   Mr. Mashudu was killed in a car accident in 1987, and Mr. Ranwashe said
   he remembered Mr. Musk being one of only a handful of white people who
   attended the funeral in the family’s rural village.

   “It was unheard of during that time,” he said.

   Image
   Stanley Netshituka, the first black student at Pretoria Boys High
   School, in his home in Midrand, South Africa. His son Masase
   (background image, right) also attended the school. Credit...Joao
   Silva/The New York Times

   Errol Musk, who worked as an engineer, said that his family did not buy
   into the negative propaganda about freedom fighters, some of whom had
   resorted to violent sabotage to combat a regime that stripped them of
   political rights and freedoms like choosing where to live.

   “But, I mean, we were concerned about them putting off a bomb next to
   our house, for example,” he said.

   Errol Musk, who has been estranged from Elon, said he believed that
   apartheid had taught his son not to discriminate. But Elon’s electric
   car company, Tesla, has faced serious accusations of racism. The state
   of California is investigating accusations that the company allowed
   racial discrimination against Black employees to flourish in its
   factory in the San Francisco area. Tesla was also ordered to pay $15
   million to a Black employee after a jury found last year that the
   company had failed to address the racism he faced at work.

   Elon Musk has largely recalled his life in South Africa as traumatic
   and unfulfilling. Born in Pretoria, about 45 minutes north of
   Johannesburg, his parents divorced before he was 10. He moved to Durban
   on the country’s south coast with his mother, but then returned to live
   with his father in Pretoria. They had a tense relationship, Mr. Musk
   has said.

   At Bryanston High, where Mr. Musk completed the first two years of the
   five-year South African high school curriculum, he recalled being
   bullied heavily.

   Image
   Elon Musk (front row, far left) was a member of the chess A team at
   Bryanston High School in 1985. Credit...Bryanston High School Yearbook

   If Bryanston High was said to be traumatic for him, Mr. Musk found more
   stability at Pretoria Boys, a sprawling campus fit for a Harry Potter
   set, with a forest of evergreens, a pond and English-revival buildings.

   Some students lived on campus, while others, like Mr. Musk, commuted
   from home and were known as “day boys.”

   The specter of apartheid was imbued in the culture. Like many other
   schools of that era, there was a cadet program that groomed the boys
   for military service. They would wear brown uniforms and do marching
   drills. There was a Scottish pipe band.

   Mr. Musk’s current views on free speech seem to reflect the
   philosophies students were exposed to at Pretoria Boys, said Mr. Beney,
   the classmate — like that of the English philosopher John Stuart Mill,
   a champion of unchecked expression.

   “I think his ideas about free speech are very classic liberal and not
   nuanced,” Mr. Beney said of Mr. Musk.

   Some who knew Mr. Musk from his young days in South Africa said people
   should not discount the evolution he could have gone through once he
   left apartheid and South Africa behind. Andrew Panzera, who was in
   German class with Mr. Musk at Bryanston High, recalled his own
   transformation.

   As a white student coming up in the placid Johannesburg suburbs, he
   never saw the suffering of his Black counterparts. That changed,
   though, when he did his government-mandated military service.

   “People, at some point, realize that they’ve been fed a whole lot of
   crap,” he said. “At some point you go, ‘Jeepers, we really were
   indoctrinated to a large extent.’”

   Image
   Mr. Musk in Chicago in 2018.Credit... Joshua Lott/Getty Images

   Kitty Bennett contributed research.

   Advertisement
   Continue reading the main story

Site Information Navigation

     * © 2022 The New York Times Company

     * NYTCo
     * Contact Us
     * Accessibility
     * Work with us
     * Advertise
     * T Brand Studio
     * Your Ad Choices
     * Privacy Policy
     * Terms of Service
     * Terms of Sale
     * Site Map
     * Canada
     * International
     * Help
     * Subscriptions

   IFRAME:
   https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-P528B3&gtm_auth=tfAzqo1
   rYDLgYhmTnSjPqw&gtm_preview=env-130&gtm_cookies_win=x
