   #alternate alternate

   BBC Homepage
     * Skip to content
     * Accessibility Help

     * Your account

     * Home
     * News
     * Sport
     * Reel
     * Worklife
     * Travel
     * Future
     * More menu

   More menu
   Search BBC
     * Home
     * News
     * Sport
     * Reel
     * Worklife
     * Travel
     * Future
     * Culture
     * Music
     * TV
     * Weather
     * Sounds

   (BUTTON) Close menu
   BBC News

   Menu
     * Home
     * War in Ukraine
     * Coronavirus
     * Climate
     * Video
     * World
     * UK
     * Business
     * Tech
     * Science

   More
     * Stories
     * Entertainment & Arts
     * Health
     * World News TV
     * In Pictures
     * Reality Check
     * Newsbeat
     * Long Reads

     * World
     * Africa
     * Asia
     * Australia
     * Europe
     * Latin America
     * Middle East
     * US & Canada

Race in South Africa: 'We haven't learnt we are human beings first'

     * Published
       21 January 2021

   (BUTTON) Share
   (BUTTON) close
   Share page
   (BUTTON) Copy link
   About sharing
   Nelson Mandela holding his fist up Image source, Corbis
   Image caption,
   The election of Nelson Mandela as president in 1994 marked the end of
   legalised racial discrimination

   Legal discrimination along racial lines in South Africa ended with the
   demise of apartheid but racial categorisation is still being used by
   the government for monitoring economic changes and continues to cause
   controversy, as Mohammed Allie writes from Cape Town.

   The charge of fraud made three months ago against teacher Glen Snyman
   for ticking the "African" box on his application form when applying for
   a head teacher job in 2017 has highlighted the country's ongoing
   problem with racial classification.

   Mr Snyman, who was defined as coloured (mixed racial heritage) by the
   apartheid government, subsequently had the charge dropped by the local
   authority but the issue the case raised has not gone away.

   The Population Registration Act was the cornerstone of the apartheid
   policy that legalised discrimination. It was introduced in 1950 and
   divided South Africans into four broad groups - white, African,
   coloured and Indian - to enforce the minority government's policy of
   racial segregation.

   It was repealed in 1991 as the country moved towards democratic
   governance in 1994 but racial classification is still very much part of
   the conversation in the country.
   Glen Snyman
   Parc

   The government and private sector should deliver to all South Africans
   equally and not discriminate on identity"

     Glen Snyman
     People Against Racial Classification

   1px transparent line

   The government uses it to gather data to help redress the stark
   imbalances in income and economic opportunities that are a legacy of
   the official racism of the past.

   But many in the country, including Mr Snyman, who founded the
   organisation People Against Racial Classification (Parc) in 2010,
   believe the use of the categories has no place in a democratic South
   Africa.

   "The fact that the Population Registration Act was scrapped gives job
   recruitment officers, any government or private system, no legal right
   to classify any South African by race," he wrote in a submission to the
   country's Human Rights Commission.

'Use class, not race'

   While acknowledging there are still huge imbalances that need to be
   redressed, Mr Snyman suggests that government should instead use a
   poverty measure to replace racial classification as a means of giving
   those in need a much-needed leg-up.

   "The government doesn't have to know the identity of people by groups,
   they need to know the people who are in need of services, jobs or
   whatever the need might be.

   "The government and private sector should deliver to all South Africans
   equally and not discriminate on identity," he said.
   Sign saying 'White Area" Image source, Getty Images
   Image caption,
   Apartheid laws privileged white people and separated South Africans
   along racial lines

   Ryland Fisher, a former newspaper editor who initiated the One City
   Many Cultures project in 1999 while at the Cape Times, agrees.

   "If we adopt class as the marker for redress we will inevitably be able
   to benefit more black people," he said.

   "Blacks are the majority in this country and they are also the majority
   of poor people in this country.

   "If you say you will redress on the basis of class, a black person who
   has lived a life of privilege won't qualify for economic opportunities
   via the government's affirmative action policies."

   During the 1970s when the anti-apartheid struggle was gaining momentum,
   and inspired by the Black Consciousness Movement led by famed activist
   Steve Biko and the South African Students Organisation, many among the
   disenfranchised - African, coloured and Indian - identified as black in
   a statement of solidarity in the fight to topple the apartheid regime.

'We regard ourselves as black'

   And it is in this vein that Mr Snyman has received support from the
   country's largest teaching union, the South African Democratic Teachers
   Union.

   "Many of us have made a conscious decision not to identify with the
   racial classification as prescribed by the apartheid regime. We regard
   ourselves as black, African, South African," says the union's Western
   Cape spokesperson Jonavon Rustin.

   Pointing to a much more nuanced understanding of identity, he adds that
   "some people embrace the ethnic classification of coloured, Khoisan,
   African, Xhosa, Zulu, white, Camissa African, Korana African, Griqua,
   European, Afrikaner and so on."

   But some make a distinction between a political or cultural identity
   and addressing the imbalances created by apartheid.
   Zodwa Ntuli
   B-BBEE Commission

   No-one is permitted to use the racial or gender classification for
   purposes of excluding any citizen from enjoying the rights in the
   country, that would be illegal"

     Zodwa Ntuli
     Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment Commissioner

   1px transparent line

   Zodwa Ntuli, South Africa's Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment
   (B-BBEE) Commissioner argues that as much as racial classification is
   an anomaly in a country trying to move away from its race-based past,
   regulators and government can only measure progress through statistics
   based on the old categories.

   The impact of apartheid discrimination against Africans, Indians and
   coloured people, she points out, was so pervasive that white people
   continue to dominate the economy in terms of ownership and
   decision-making power.

   But she stresses that "no-one in South Africa is permitted to use the
   racial or gender classification for purposes of excluding any citizen
   from enjoying the rights in the country - that would be illegal".
   Top management positions in South Africa. % in 2017. .
   1px transparent line

   Kganki Matabane, who heads the Black Business Council, says that even
   though democratic rule is nearly 27 years old, it is still too soon to
   ditch the old categories.

   "We need to ask: Have we managed to correct those imbalances? If we
   have not, which is the case - if you look at the top 100 Johannesburg
   Stock Exchange-listed companies, 75% or more of the CEOs are white
   males - then we have to continue with them."

   As apartheid discriminated on the basis of race then that is the only
   way the problems can be dealt with, rather than looking at class, he
   adds.

   "We can only have a sunset clause when the economy reflects the
   demographics of the country. Until it gets to that, it will be
   premature to talk about the end of black economic empowerment."
   2px presentational grey line

   More on race relations in South Africa:

   This video can not be played

To play this video you need to enable JavaScript in your browser.

   Media caption,

   South Africa's coloured community: Not black enough, not white enough?
     * Who runs South African business?
     * South Africa's 'toxic' race relations

   2px presentational grey line

   But in some cases the continued use of racial classification to monitor
   change has led to the hardening of the categories.

   In the Western Cape, which has a large number of people formerly
   classified as coloured, there is a long-standing feeling among some
   that in an effort to redress the problems from the past, the democratic
   government has ignored their needs.
   South Africa's racial make-up. . South Africa's population by race
   Total population: 57.7 million.

   In Cape Town, a group of activists who identify as coloured, started a
   pressure group called the Gatvol ("fed up") Capetonian movement in
   2018.

   In an introductory video on the group's Facebook page, their leader
   Fadiel Adams explains that "all arms of government have declared an
   economic war on the coloured people", complaining that there are no
   jobs for members of the community despite them making up the majority
   in the area.

   Mr Fisher, the former newspaper editor, said people who were classified
   as coloured were happy to fight alongside black people in the
   anti-apartheid struggle. But he blames the African National Congress
   (ANC) government for the sharpening of racial differences.

   "What has happened in recent years is that the majority [in Western
   Cape] has decided to raise their voices and to assert their right to
   identify as coloured.

   "The ANC didn't really take into consideration these kinds of nuances.
   They alienated people who identified themselves as coloured. What it
   meant is that these people… identified the kind of things that could
   affirm their identity as coloured people including things around
   culture, food, music and language."

   He, and others, accuse the ANC-led government of not doing enough for
   coloured people, and instead concentrating on the national majority,
   who are officially classified as African, or black.

'We need to identify as South Africans'

   Dr Saths Cooper, a clinical psychologist who was an associate of Steve
   Biko during his student days in the 1970s, argues that dominance of a
   racial identity has prevented the forging of a truly common identity.

   "We haven't learnt we are human beings first," he says.

   "We always put a colour, we put external attributes to it and then we
   put maybe language and maybe belief to it and that allows for further
   division. That narrative then perpetuates itself.

   "We haven't given people enough reason to say we identify as South
   Africans."

   Mr Snyman, through Parc, is meanwhile continuing the fight to outlaw
   racial classification. "We will take all steps, including legal ones to
   rid South Africa of this scourge that has once again led to
   discrimination against those who do not meet the preferred criteria of
   the present government."

More on this story

     * How race relations in the 'rainbow nation' have become toxic
          + 18 December 2018
       Two children have their faces painted in the colors of the national
       flag, 30 August 1996 in Warrenton, north of Capetown, where
       South-African president Nelson Mandela is going to inaugurate a
       school
     * 'Not black enough, not white enough' Video, 00:10:15'Not black
       enough, not white enough'
          + 22 November 2018
       10:15
       Vauldi Carelse
     * Who runs South African business?
          + 5 May 2019
       Young black South African sits at a computer

Related Topics

     * Apartheid
     * South Africa
     * Race and ethnicity
     * Black interest

Top Stories

     * Former Chinese leader Jiang Zemin dies aged 96
          + Published
            23 minutes ago
     * Fresh Covid clashes break out in China's Guangzhou
          + Published
            1 hour ago
     * Ros Atkins on... China's protest crackdown. VideoRos Atkins on...
       China's protest crackdown
          + Published
            8 hours ago

Features

     * ‘How I escaped my father’s militia’
       Dakota with father Stuart Rhodes
     * Pulisic winner sends USA through as Iran go out
       Christian Pulisic
     * Ros Atkins on... China's protest crackdown. VideoRos Atkins on...
       China's protest crackdown
       A demonstrator holds up a blank sheet of paper
     *
     * Germans wary of new influx of Ukrainian refugees
       A refugee with a child walks at an accommodation centre for
       refugees, including Ukrainians, inside former airport Tegel in
       Berlin, Germany November 9, 2022
     * 'A poignant moment for true talent Rashford'
       Marcus Rashford and Phil Foden
     * A 200km ride along Ireland's peat bogs
       Peat bog in Ireland
     * How Asia's richest man will run India's top TV channel
       Gautam Adani
     * Philippines sees a pandemic boom in child sex abuse
       Maria
     * The airbase that became a symbol of Russian defeat
       Ukrainian soldiers stand in front of a destroyed building of the
       International Airport of Kherson in the village of Chornobaivka,
       outskirts of Kherson, on November 20, 2022

Elsewhere on the BBC

     * Is this the greatest taboo of all?
       pensive sitting
     * 'I regret the role, not my daughter'
       Mum with baby
     * Artemis I: The giant rocket setting new records
       NASA rocket

Most Read

    1. 1
       Former Chinese leader Jiang Zemin dies aged 96
    2. 2
       Alzheimer's drug hailed as momentous breakthrough
    3. 3
       NZ and Finland PMs dismiss 'sexist' question
    4. 4
       Talking to Russians on Ukraine's surrender hotline
    5. 5
       Fresh Covid clashes break out in China's Guangzhou
    6. 6
       A trip to the park - no mums allowed
    7. 7
       Kanye West to pay Kim Kardashian child support
    8. 8
       Outback Wrangler charged over fatal chopper crash
    9. 9
       Oath Keepers founder guilty of US sedition
   10. 10
       ‘How I escaped my father’s militia’

BBC News Services

     * On your mobile
     * On smart speakers
     * Get news alerts
     * Contact BBC News

     * Home
     * News
     * Sport
     * Reel
     * Worklife
     * Travel
     * Future
     * Culture
     * Music
     * TV
     * Weather
     * Sounds

     * Terms of Use
     * About the BBC
     * Privacy Policy
     * Cookies
     * Accessibility Help
     * Parental Guidance
     * Contact the BBC
     * Get Personalised Newsletters
     * Why you can trust the BBC
     * Advertise with us
     * AdChoices / Do Not Sell My Info

   © 2022 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external
   sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
