   IFRAME: https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-W5D7ZP

   Skip to cookie privacy notice Skip to main content
   (BUTTON)
   Languages
     * English
     * العربية
     * 简体中文
     * 繁體中文
     * Français
     * Deutsch
     * Português
     * Русский
     * Español

   Donate Now

South Africa

   Events of 2020

   Protesters march to a local police station to protest over rising
   levels of violence against women and children, in Thokoza township,
   east of Johannesburg, South Africa, Saturday, July 4, 2020.

   © 2020 AP Photo/Themba Hadebe.

   Share this via Facebook Share this via Twitter Share this via WhatsApp
   Share this via Email Other ways to share Share this via LinkedIn Share
   this via Reddit Share this via Telegram Share this via Printer
    1. Xenophobic Attacks on Foreign Nationals
    2. Women’s Rights
    3. Children’s Rights
    4. Covid-19
    5. Foreign Policy

   Share this via Facebook Share this via Twitter Share this via WhatsApp
   Share this via Email Other ways to share Share this via LinkedIn Share
   this via Reddit Share this via Telegram Share this via Printer

Keynote

     A young boy raises his fist during a demonstration in Atlanta,
   Georgia, May 31, 2020.
   Biden’s Challenge: Redeeming a US Role for Human Rights
   Kenneth Roth
   Former Executive Director

Essays

     Illustration of a windmill with leaves for blades
   Addressing the Climate Crisis in Times of Pandemic

   As More Climate Chaos Looms, Slashing Fossil Fuels Is Key
     Illustration of people on video conference calls
   From Flight Logs to Homeschooling, Human Rights Watch Grapples with
   Covid’s Challenges
     An illustration of a pointer icons flying towards a woman in a dress
   As Online Gender-Based Violence Booms, Governments Drag Their Feet
     An illustration of a man sitting in ankle chains
   Lockdown in Chains
     An illustration of a woman and child standing outside of businesses
   with closed signs
   The Other Pandemic: Fighting Inequality as We Beat Back Covid
     An illustration of a boy wearing a backpack on the street
   Poverty, Pandemic, Police Violence: Ongoing Crises Demand the US
   Address Pervasive Racism
     An illustration of a family walking through water
   Rethinking Asylum on a Warming Planet

   During 2020, South Africa continued to experience incidents of
   xenophobic violence and discrimination against non-nationals
   despite the government’s launch of the National Action Plan to Combat
   Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance
   (NAP) in 2019. Law enforcement officials often responded with
   indifference or provided inadequate remedies to xenophobic
   attacks. Refugees and asylum seekers faced barriers to protection.
   This included  a newly enacted law restricting access to asylum
   and a huge government backlog in processing claims and
   appeals. The government’s Covid-19 aid programs, including food
   parcels during national lockdown, overlooked people
   with disabilities, refugees and asylum seekers and many lesbian, gay,
   bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) people. President Cyril Ramaphosa
   appointed two special envoys to help resolve the political crisis in
   Zimbabwe and South Africa joined 66 other states in reaffirming support
   for the International Criminal Court.
   South African man being searched by police
   (BUTTON)

Xenophobic Attacks on Foreign Nationals

   South Africa continued to be plagued by widespread incidents
   of xenophobic harassment and attacks against foreigners by mobs during
   2020.The attacks and harassment were also committed by government and
   law enforcement officials. Non-nationals have also been harassed
   verbally and physically by South Africans for being foreign and not
   using local languages in their daily interactions. A common and hurtful
   insult thrown at foreigners is the label “kwerekwere,” a derogatory
   slang used by Black South Africans to mean “foreigner.”

   Government and law enforcement officials throughout the country not
   only largely failed to ensure justice for xenophobic violence, but
   also operated in discriminatory and abusive ways against non-nationals.
   Some officials exacerbated xenophobia through inciteful rhetoric, while
   the South African Police Service (SAPS) and Metro Police used
   counterfeit goods raids as a cover to target foreign-owned shops and
   businesses. During the raids, police officers beat foreign shop
   owners and fired tear gas and rubber
   bullets at them.  Ransacking and destroying their shops. Victims in the
   Johannesburg Central Business District and Diepsloot alleged that the
   police then resold confiscated goods back to them.

   In coordination with the Department of Home Affairs (DHA), police
   conducted abusive “documentation raids” in areas where many
   non-nationals reside, including by entering foreigners’ homes to verify
   documents and legal status while administering beatings.

   While the 2019 National Action Plan to combat xenophobia, racism, and
   discrimination marked an important step toward recognizing
   and addressing these abuses, it has not ensured accountability for
   xenophobic crimes.

Women’s Rights

   South Africa is facing a crisis of gender-based violence (GBV). In
   April, Police Minister Bheki Cele noted that police registered over
   2,300 complaints of gender-based violence between March 27 to March 31,
   2020, during the lockdown implemented to reduce the spread of the
   coronavirus.

   In June 2020, following protests against the murder of Tshegofatso
   Pule, a 28-year-old woman whose body was found dumped in Soweto,
   Johannesburg, President Ramaphosa acknowledged that South Africa had
   among the highest levels of intimate partner violence in the world. As
   much as 51 percent of South African women have experienced violence at
   the hands of someone with whom they were in an intimate relationship.
   He described violence against girls and women as South Africa's “second
   pandemic,” after the coronavirus, and called on residents to end the
   culture of silence around gender-based violence and report perpetrators
   to the SAPS.

   In September, Ramaphosa said three bills to amend the Criminal Law
   (Sexual Offences and Related Matters), Criminal and Related Matters
   Act, and the Domestic Violence Act had been introduced in parliament to
   “fill the gaps that allow perpetrators of these crimes to evade justice
   and to give full effect to the rights of our country’s women and
   children.” He said that a public register of sex offenders with all
   relevant details would also be introduced. Civil society
   organizations have expressed concerns that GBV victims faced
   worsening violence and the inability to access help under the lockdown

   South Africa continues to criminalize sex work and prohibit other
   aspects of sex work. This includes criminalizing running or owning a
   brothel, living off of the earnings of “prostitution,” and enticing a
   woman into “prostitution.” Criminalization has undermined sex workers’
   access to justice for crimes committed against them and exposed them to
   unchecked abuse and exploitation by law enforcement officials,
   including police officers. Although the Department of Health’s National
   Strategic Plan on HIV for Sex Workers is grounded in respect for the
   human rights of sex workers, criminalization hinders sex workers’
   efforts to access health care, including HIV prevention, treatment,
   care and support.

   In October 2020, South Africa’s Department of Social
   Development said it has failed sex workers by not providing them with
   services such as counselling, safety and security and giving them other
   options to opt-out of sex work when they wish to do so. Deputy Minister
   of Social Development Hendrietta Bogopane-Zulu committed to elevating
   sex workers’ issues. Some government departments expressed support for
   the decriminalization of sex work to assist sex workers to access all
   government services and reduce their victimization and exposure to
   violence.

Children’s Rights

   Due to the Covid-19 pandemic, more than 13 million children across
   South Africa were affected by school closures. The closures lasted
   about six months, exacerbating existing inequalities. Children who
   were already at risk of being excluded from accessing quality education
   have been most affected.

   The South African government’s responses to the Covid-19 pandemic
   worsened the plight of children across South Africa in 2020. This
   included the closure of the National School Nutrition Programme (NSNP)
   without contingency plans to feed 9 million economically vulnerable
   children during the national lockdown.

   The government also closed  schools and Early Childhood Development
   (ECD) centers with inadequate plans to keep children learning during
   lockdown. The government also neglected to ensure that learning
   platforms were inclusive for learners with disabilities. There has been
   a failure to prepare for the timeous reopening of ECDs, and a lack of
   provisions and resources to protect children from violence.

   The case of Centre for Child Law and Others v. Minister of Basic
   Education and Others, decided by the High Court of South Africa in
   December 2019, on behalf of 37 children without birth certificates who
   were barred from enrolling in Eastern Cape schools, revealed that many
   children born in South Africa, whether to citizens or
   foreigners, were not given birth certificates.

   The court ordered Eastern Cape public schools to accept alternative
   proof of identity for the 37 undocumented children and declared that
   the Immigration Act 13 of 2002 did not “prohibit the admission of
   illegal foreign children into schools.” Moreover, the minister of
   education was prohibited from removing or excluding
   already-admitted students because they lacked or could not produce
   specific identification documents.

Covid-19

   As of mid-November, South Africa had 757,144 confirmed Covid-19 cases
   with 20,556 deaths, one of the highest figures across Africa.
   The government’s Covid-19 aid programs, including food parcels,
   overlooked refugees and asylum seekers. Many lesbian, gay, bisexual,
   and transgender (LGBT) African asylum seekers and undocumented
   migrants were also overlooked. Sex worker rights groups also noted that
   this vulnerable population had been left out of relief planning. The
   government did not sufficiently consult with people with disabilities
   in its Covid-19 policies, leaving many at serious risk
   of Covid-19 infection, hunger, and other harms.

   Authorities failed to take urgent steps to facilitate support,
   including from donors, for refugees and asylum seekers whose access to
   food and other basic necessities were limited during the nationwide
   lockdown.  On May 12,  the rapporteur for South Africa at the African
   Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights, Solomon Ayele Dersso, sent
   an urgent appeal to the government to protect the rights of vulnerable
   groups, including refugees, asylum seekers and migrants in the context
   of the lockdown to combat the coronavirus.

Foreign Policy

   In February 2020, South Africa became the chair of the African Union
   (AU) for a year. In keeping with the summit theme of Silencing the
   Guns, President Ramaphosa, as AU chairperson, spoke in Addis Ababa of
   an Africa “that is prosperous and at peace with itself.” Other leaders
   pledged that the 55-member bloc will play a greater role in resolving
   protracted conflicts and will work to unlock the continent’s economic
   potential.

   On March 24, the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights in a
   letter to President Ramaphosa expressed concern about the vulnerability
   of refugees and asylum seekers under South Africa’s
   Covid-19 regulations. The commission urged the South African government
   to adequately address human rights issues in its responses to Covid-19,
   including ensuring that undocumented refugees and asylum seekers in
   South Africa have access to basic services.

   In 2020, South Africa served its second year as a non-permanent member
   of the United Nations Security Council. On September
   22, in his address to the 75th UN General Assembly, President Ramaphosa
   reaffirmed South Africa’s commitment to the ideals and spirit of the UN
   Charter and to sparing no effort to bring about a more just, peaceful
   and equitable world. In September, South Africa dispatched a high-level
   delegation to Zimbabwe to help find a solution to the country’s
   escalating economic and political crisis. The team, led by
   the secretary-general of the governing African National Congress (ANC)
   party, Ace Magashule, met officials from Zimbabwe’s ruling African
   National Union-Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF) party and raised concern about
   the country’s deteriorating human rights situation.

     In June 2020, South Africa jointly issued a statement with 66 other
   member states of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
   reaffirming unwavering support for the court as an independent and
   impartial judicial institution. They said the ICC is an integral part
   of this order and a central institution in the fight against impunity
   and the pursuit of justice, which are essential components of
   sustainable peace, security, and reconciliation. This followed the
   release of the United States executive order with travel restrictions
   and economic sanctions, such as freezing assets of certain persons
   associated with the ICC. 
   Browse countries
   [Choose______________________]

Protecting Rights, Saving Lives

   Human Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries
   worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justice
   Donate Now
   Get Updates On Rights Issues From Around The Globe
   ____________________ (Sign Up) Sign Up

Connect With Us

     * Twitter
     * Facebook
     * YouTube
     * Instagram

Footer menu

     * Contact Us
     * Corrections
     * Privacy Policy
     * Permissions
     * Blackbaud Security Incident
     * Site Map
     * Child Safeguarding

   © 2022 Human Rights Watch
   Human Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY
   10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700

   Human Rights Watch is a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under
   EIN: 13-2875808
