   #alternate alternate

   BBC Homepage
     * Skip to content
     * Accessibility Help

     * Your account

     * Home
     * News
     * Sport
     * Reel
     * Worklife
     * Travel
     * Future
     * More menu

   More menu
   Search BBC
     * Home
     * News
     * Sport
     * Reel
     * Worklife
     * Travel
     * Future
     * Culture
     * Music
     * TV
     * Weather
     * Sounds

   (BUTTON) Close menu
   BBC News

   Menu
     * Home
     * War in Ukraine
     * Coronavirus
     * Climate
     * Video
     * World
     * UK
     * Business
     * Tech
     * Science

   More
     * Stories
     * Entertainment & Arts
     * Health
     * World News TV
     * In Pictures
     * Reality Check
     * Newsbeat
     * Long Reads

     * World
     * Africa
     * Asia
     * Australia
     * Europe
     * Latin America
     * Middle East
     * US & Canada

South Africa's 'toxic' race relations

     * Published
       18 December 2018

   (BUTTON) Share
   (BUTTON) close
   Share page
   (BUTTON) Copy link
   About sharing
   Two children have their faces painted in the colours of the national
   flag, 30 August 1996 in Warrenton, north of Capetown, where
   South-African president Nelson Mandela is going to inaugurate a school
   Image source, Getty Images

   BBC Africa editor Fergal Keane visits South Africa's conservative rural
   areas nearly 25 years after white-minority rule ended, and finds that
   racism is still deeply embedded but there are also symbols of racial
   reconciliation.

   It was a young boy who noticed us and ran to tell his father. Around 10
   years old, blond-haired and barefoot, he rushed indoors. The child
   looked scared. It was dusk and we were strangers.

   I caught sight of him in the rear-view mirror as we drove along the
   dirt road that ran past the tall steel fence that encircled their home.

   Maybe 10 minutes later, a car approached from behind. Headlights
   flashed, beckoning us to stop.

Revolver on hip

   We pulled up within a few yards of each other. It was an old car, a
   Toyota from the 1990s. Beaten and rusted, it is a vehicle of the rural
   poor.

   A young white man got out. He wore a baseball cap pulled down over his
   forehead and his right hand sat on the revolver strapped to his hip.
   Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) supporters gather outside the North
   Gauteng High Court during the partys bid to challenge the
   constitutionality of the Riotous Assemblies Act on September 20, 2018
   in Pretoria, South Africa Image source, Getty Images
   Image caption,
   The government is under pressure to increase ownership of land among
   black people

   There was a young woman with a baby on her lap in the front seat. She
   looked exhausted, her hair lank and eyes struggling to stay open. The
   child was ill, coughing and its face covered in red blotches.

   I saw the man relax as I got out of the car and approached him. I
   greeted him in Afrikaans. The hand came away from his hip.

   "You frightened them, you know," he said, pointing towards the house.

   "They called up on the radio and we came to check on you. They didn't
   know who you was. We talk to each other on the radio."

   This video can not be played

To play this video you need to enable JavaScript in your browser.

   Media caption,

   Firi Lekhetha and Bernadette Hall remain symbols of the "rainbow
   nation"

   He said there had been farm attacks in the area. There was constant
   theft.

   The young man pointed across the railway tracks to where the fields
   were now dissolving into the dark.

   "The farmer over there, if he sees anyone on his land, he is likely to
   just take a shot. He will fire at anything. Be more careful, man," he
   said.

'We will level them with the gravel'

   This was near Potchefstroom on the "platteland" - an Afrikaans word
   which refers to the great rolling heartland encompassing vast swathes
   of the South African interior.

   More than 20 years after watching black and white leaders negotiate an
   end to the racist system of apartheid, I was driving west of the main
   city, Johannesburg, to test how much had changed in what had been the
   most conservative part of South Africa.
   Supporters of the white supremacist Afrikaans Resistance Movement (AWB)
   arrive on November 22, 2010 at the Ventersdorp magistrate court for the
   trial of a 15-year-old minor and his co-accused Chris Mahlangu, 28,
   charged with hacking to death the 69-year-old leader of the AWB, Eugene
   Terre'Blanche, in April. Image source, AFP
   Image caption,
   South Africa's white supremacist movement was once a major threat to
   stability

   Potchefstroom, Ventersdorp, Fochville and numerous other towns and
   villages had provided the muscle for an abortive right-wing rebellion.

   The leader of the neo-Nazi Afrikaner Resistance Movement (AWB), Eugene
   Terreblanche, had sworn never to surrender to black rule.

   "We will level them with the gravel," I'd heard him declare one hot
   afternoon in Ventersdorp. There were threats to set up white republics.
   map

   But the rebellion failed, snuffed out when a black soldier killed three
   AWB members in cold blood on a rural road and terrified the rest into
   going home and living with the new dispensation.

   This was after AWB members shot civilians in and around the platteland
   town of Mafeking in March 1994.

Resenting inequality

   Terreblanche was murdered 16 years later by one of his own workers. His
   movement splintered, shrank and became irrelevant.

   Most Afrikaners accepted the compromise which led to black majority
   rule.
   map

   But travelling across the platteland, it is obvious that while dreams
   of white secession have evaporated, there is much that is unchanged.

   I was going back to a place where many black people resent the
   inequality which keeps 67% of arable farmland in white hands, and where
   white people fear violent attack and dispossession.

   It is not that South Africa has become newly racist, unequal or
   violent. It was always all of these things.

   The violence of racial discrimination and the resentment it bred are
   part of the nation's DNA.

'Beaten unconscious'

   Social media has provided an outlet for amplifying the crudest racial
   slurs and anger over corruption and inequality have stoked an
   increasingly febrile environment.

   What is striking is the way in which racial resentment can still be so
   brutally expressed.

   Last February a 22-year-old black athlete, Thabang Mosiako, was walking
   with some friends in Potchefstroom when he saw a shop assistant being
   insulted by a group of young white men.
   Thabang Mosiako
   Image caption,
   Thabang Mosiako was born after minority rule ended in 1994

   It was a Saturday night. When Mr Mosiako and a friend intervened, they
   were set upon.

   "They were hitting me until I was unconscious," he remembered. "Then I
   woke up in the hospital, not knowing what happened."

   His friend, also an athlete, suffered a broken arm. Mr Mosiako runs for
   South Africa and lost three months from his training because of the
   beating he received.

   Worse, he says, is the lingering trauma and fear when he sees groups of
   white men.

   "I feel really scared. I can't even go to town alone. I don't know when
   and where will they come back again."

'Alcohol thrown'

   Travel 300km (186 miles) north-east to the town of Middelburg and you
   learn that racist violence can still be lethal. The town has some bad
   history.

   In August 2016 two white farmers were filmed beating and then forcing a
   black man into a coffin in which they told him he would be buried
   alive. They were given sentences of 11 and 14 years.
   Map

   In another case, Xolisile Ndongzana, 26, was driving home in Middleburg
   one night last July when he found the road blocked by a group of white
   men.

   They approached the car and threw alcohol through the open window,
   drenching the occupants. Mr Ndongzana was dragged out. His friend,
   Laurence Nelumoni, witnessed the violence.

   "They pulled out my friend and beat him. When I tried to save him, it
   was too late. They used all these 'k-words' - black, kaffir,
   everything. It was terrible."

   The "k-word" was the most offensive racial slur used to humiliate black
   people during the apartheid years. It is a symbol of de-humanisation.

   Mr Ndongzana died of his injuries. The white attackers have yet to be
   charged.

   Mr Nelumoni is rueful when I ask if those who witnessed the end of
   apartheid were wrong to believe in a "rainbow nation" - the multiracial
   patchwork of peaceful co-operating groups.

   "You were wrong. It's not a rainbow nation. Whites still have more
   powers."
   Presentational grey line

What was apartheid?

   An apartheid notice on a beach near Capetown, denoting the area for
   whites only. Image source, Getty Images
     * Introduced in 1948 by the Afrikaner-led National Party government
     * Black people regarded as inferior
     * No vote for black people in national election
     * Races segregated in all aspects of life
     * Prevented black people from owning land in much of South Africa
     * Reserved most skilled jobs for white people
     * Scrapped in 1994 with the election of Nelson Mandela as first black
       president

   Presentational grey line

   As so often in this country, and in this particular place, there are
   competing narratives of fear.

   The white farmers of the platteland worry that their land will be
   seized under government proposals to take property without
   compensation.

Inflammatory words

   Populist politicians in the radical Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) and
   some local leaders of the governing African Nationalist Congress (ANC)
   have been accused of stoking racial tensions.

   The South African Human Rights Commission is taking one radical black
   leader to court over comments he made calling for the killing of white
   people.

   Andile Mngxitama, who leads the Black Land First organisation,
   represents a political fringe but his comments have received widespread
   publicity and heightened racial tensions.
   White South Africans holding balloons and crosses march to protest
   against the violent murder of farmers which they term 'genocide and
   oppressive state policies in favour of blacks' in Pretoria on October
   10, 2013 Image source, AFP
   Image caption,
   Some white South Africans allege that murders on farms amount to a
   genocide

   The attacks on white farms - long a feature of rural life - have
   deepened a sense of alienation from the government on the part of some
   white farms.

   Right-wing groups have spread the myth of a white genocide abroad.
   There is no genocide but there is genuine fear of physical attack and
   dispossession.
   Presentational grey line

   More on race relations:
     * The groups playing on the fears of a 'white genocide’
     * Is South Africa ready for mixed-race love?

   Presentational grey line

   Bernadette Hall witnessed the murder of her husband on their farm near
   Fochville in 2012.

   Her land is parched and browned from a long southern winter without
   rain. The cattle are lean. We are standing outside the dairy building
   where Mrs Hall witnessed her husband's death.

   "They beat him and he fought with them. But by the end he was on his
   knees and the one black guy just shot him," she said.

   She was beaten and tied up as the attackers hunted for money and guns.
   They found neither.

   Her two sons live in the nearby town and constantly urge their mother
   to move away from the farm. But she will not go.

   "This is my land. I didn't steal it. Why should I move? I belong here,"
   Mrs Hall said.

Capacity to surprise

   Had I left at that moment, I would have come away with an impression of
   a world incapable of change. The angry racist outbursts and the
   constant discussion of race on social media give the country a
   claustrophobic feel these days.
   chart

   But a recent opinion poll by the South African Institute of Race
   Relations think tank gives some cause for hope.

   The telephone survey found that 77% of black respondents had never
   "personally experienced racism directed against them".

   The same percentage said that "with better education and more jobs, the
   differences between the races will disappear".

   Another survey by Afrobarometer found that 92% of South Africans
   expressed themselves as tolerant towards other ethnicities.

   Then something happened on our platteland journey. It was at once
   surprising and yet strangely familiar, a testament to this country's
   endless capacity to surprise.

   Earlier we had spotted a bush fire sending a huge cloud of white smoke
   into the pale blue of the sky. It seemed to be growing in strength.
   There was a call to Mrs Hall's phone. The man on the other end was
   speaking Afrikaans and talking about the fire.

   "Come on. He needs help," she said.

'Great neighbours'

   We headed in the direction of the smoke. Mrs Hall led the way in her
   "bakkie" - the ubiquitous pickup jeeps of the platteland - and in a few
   minutes we were in the middle of the fire and Mrs Hall was shaking the
   hands of a black man who was fighting the flames.

   "This is Firi. He's my neighbour," she said.
   Bernadette Hall puting out a bush fire in South Africa
   Image caption,
   Bernadette Hall went to her black neighbour's aid to fight a bush fire

   Firi Lekhetha owned the land next to Mrs Hall. He was a young man who
   had emigrated to the UK to play professional rugby, earned some money
   and returned to try his hand at farming under a government scheme to
   encourage black farmers.

   Soon other white people were arriving and local black farm workers too.
   The flames were advancing towards Mr Lekhetha's home. Together the
   group fought them back. They knew the truth of the platteland fire. It
   spreads. It does not respect fences.

   "These are great neighbours," Mr Lekhetha shouted to me. "They are
   always here for me."

   The flames subsided. Exhausted people slumped on the ground or leaned
   against bakkies.

   Mr Lekhetha and Mrs Hall shook hands. He thanked her for the help; she
   thanked him for the loan of some petrol. I began to ask about the
   problems of racial animosity on the platteland.

   Mrs Hall interrupted: "What animosity do you see here? None. There's
   none."

   It would be wrong to read too much into the dynamics of a single
   incident. As I saw earlier in the journey, racism remains pervasive and
   toxic in South Africa.

   But the symbol of a fire that consumes all - irrespective of race - is
   a potent one for this country.

   As much as they did in 1994, at a time of historic compromise, South
   Africans need each other.

More on this story

     * Is the South African government seizing farmers' land?
          + 23 August 2018
       Cows feeding at Blanco near George Western Cape South Africa
     * South Africans' anger over land set to explode
          + 30 May 2018
       South African opposition protest in 2016 with someone holding up a
       sign reading "Nkanini our land".

Around the BBC

     * Africa Today podcasts

Top Stories

     * Former Chinese leader Jiang Zemin dies aged 96
          + Published
            24 minutes ago
     * Fresh Covid clashes break out in China's Guangzhou
          + Published
            1 hour ago
     * Ros Atkins on... China's protest crackdown. VideoRos Atkins on...
       China's protest crackdown
          + Published
            8 hours ago

Features

     * ‘How I escaped my father’s militia’
       Dakota with father Stuart Rhodes
     * Pulisic winner sends USA through as Iran go out
       Christian Pulisic
     * Ros Atkins on... China's protest crackdown. VideoRos Atkins on...
       China's protest crackdown
       A demonstrator holds up a blank sheet of paper
     *
     * Germans wary of new influx of Ukrainian refugees
       A refugee with a child walks at an accommodation centre for
       refugees, including Ukrainians, inside former airport Tegel in
       Berlin, Germany November 9, 2022
     * 'A poignant moment for true talent Rashford'
       Marcus Rashford and Phil Foden
     * A 200km ride along Ireland's peat bogs
       Peat bog in Ireland
     * How Asia's richest man will run India's top TV channel
       Gautam Adani
     * Philippines sees a pandemic boom in child sex abuse
       Maria
     * The airbase that became a symbol of Russian defeat
       Ukrainian soldiers stand in front of a destroyed building of the
       International Airport of Kherson in the village of Chornobaivka,
       outskirts of Kherson, on November 20, 2022

Elsewhere on the BBC

     * Is this the greatest taboo of all?
       pensive sitting
     * 'I regret the role, not my daughter'
       Mum with baby
     * Artemis I: The giant rocket setting new records
       NASA rocket

Most Read

    1. 1
       Former Chinese leader Jiang Zemin dies aged 96
    2. 2
       Alzheimer's drug hailed as momentous breakthrough
    3. 3
       NZ and Finland PMs dismiss 'sexist' question
    4. 4
       Talking to Russians on Ukraine's surrender hotline
    5. 5
       Fresh Covid clashes break out in China's Guangzhou
    6. 6
       A trip to the park - no mums allowed
    7. 7
       Kanye West to pay Kim Kardashian child support
    8. 8
       Outback Wrangler charged over fatal chopper crash
    9. 9
       Oath Keepers founder guilty of US sedition
   10. 10
       ‘How I escaped my father’s militia’

BBC News Services

     * On your mobile
     * On smart speakers
     * Get news alerts
     * Contact BBC News

     * Home
     * News
     * Sport
     * Reel
     * Worklife
     * Travel
     * Future
     * Culture
     * Music
     * TV
     * Weather
     * Sounds

     * Terms of Use
     * About the BBC
     * Privacy Policy
     * Cookies
     * Accessibility Help
     * Parental Guidance
     * Contact the BBC
     * Get Personalised Newsletters
     * Why you can trust the BBC
     * Advertise with us
     * AdChoices / Do Not Sell My Info

   © 2022 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external
   sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
