   ____________________
     * Home
     * 2014 Archive
     * 2013 Archive
     * 2012 Archives
     * 2015 Archives
     * 2016 Archives
     * 2017 Archives
     * 2018 Archives
     * 2019 Archives
     * Quick links
          + News
          + Perspective
          + Publications
          + Virtual Campus
          + Intranet
          + Giving to RU

     * News
     * Perspective
     * Publications
     * Virtual Campus
     * Intranet

   Giving to RU
     *
     * Home
     * 2014 Archive
     * 2013 Archive
     * 2012 Archives
     * 2015 Archives
     * 2016 Archives
     * 2017 Archives
     * 2018 Archives
     * 2019 Archives

   ____________________
   12
   Mar

In black and white: the truth about ‘unconstitutional’ race quotas in
universities

   Rhodes>Perspective>2013 Archive

   It is understandable (if not ethically acceptable) that some (but not
   all) white South Africans (who all continue to benefit from the effects
   of past unfair racial discrimination) would try to protect their
   unearned privileges by fighting to retain the status quo. At
   Stellenbosch University, members of this group are fighting a
   rear-guard action to try and block the full racial and linguistic
   integration of University residences. Unfortunately they are whipping
   up racial and jingoistic sentiments among former Stellenbosch students
   by making a demonstrably false claim that proposed measures to
   integrate University residences would be in breach of the Constitution.

   Like many other old (and in some circles highly regarded) institutions
   in South Africa, Stellenbosch University has a long history of racial
   discrimination and exclusion which was aimed at benefiting white
   Afrikaners and punishing and disadvantaging black people. Until the
   1980s, the University was exclusively reserved for white students and
   until the 1990s residences were racially segregated. In the late 1980s
   some of us were threatened with expulsion for taking part in a protest
   march in support of racial integration of University residences. In
   other words, for many decades Stellenbosch University implemented
   race-based affirmative action policies to benefit white Afrikaners,
   many of whom unfairly gained access to an excellent University
   education at the expense of members of other races.

   Stellenbosch University is not unique in this regard. Many other
   institutions dominated by those who benefited or continue to benefit
   from the effects of past racial discrimination (including all the so
   called “liberal” former “white” Universities), have the same history. I
   discuss the Stellenbosch situation here only as a case study of a
   larger problem.

   Ironically, many of the children and grandchildren of those white
   Afrikaners who benefited from unfair racial discrimination in the past
   and who, in turn, today enjoy educational and financial privileges
   because their parents benefited from racial oppression and
   discrimination, now fight against the implementation of redress
   measures in the name of non-racialism. Talk about Orwellian
   double-speak. They insist on the retention of a system that would
   reward the skills, privileges and benefits they acquired through the
   Apartheid system of racial discrimination, while arguing that it would
   be fair to continue punishing those who could not acquire the same
   skills, benefits and privileges because they were subjected to racial
   discrimination and oppression by some of the very people who studied at
   Stellenbosch University.

   This stance is both immoral and, it must be said, in the South African
   context utter legal nonsense.

   The opponents of integration (using the language of non-racialism and
   “cultural rights” to fight for the retention of their continued racial
   privilege) argue that a revised draft policy of the University aimed at
   improving the diversity profile of University residences “discriminates
   unfairly on the basis of one or more factors, including but not limited
   to race, ethnic or social origin, colour, age, culture and/or language”
   because it amounts to the “imposition of quotas based on race and/or
   language” and is “in conflict with the right of people who belong to
   specific language and cultural communities to use that language and
   culture”. They are hoping that an extraordinary meeting of Stellenbosch
   graduates will vote against this policy to place political pressure on
   management to drop the integration scheme.

   The draft policy states that “in the first round” when first-year
   students are placed in University residences, the applicants will be
   placed in residences “on the basis of academic merit”. To achieve the
   diversity profile targets for residences (set by management every
   year), five “diversity factors” will be taken into account:

   “(1) South African citizen or international student; (2) language
   preference (Afrikaans, English or Other); (3) ethnicity (Coloured,
   Black, Indian or White); (4) first- or non-first-generation student;
   and (5) economic class (for students who need financial support in the
   form of bursaries and who qualify for such support on the basis of a
   means test).”

   A previous version of the policy stated that the ideal racial breakdown
   of residences should be 35% “brown”, 20% “black”, 40% “white”, 5%
   “Indian”. It also gave a language breakdown as 45% Afrikaans, 40%
   English and 15% other.

   Of course, there is nothing in the Constitution (or in the Promotion of
   Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act, which will apply
   in this case) that prohibits an institution from imposing quotas on the
   basis of race or language in order to address the effects of past and
   on-going discrimination and to achieve integration. The Employment
   Equity Act does prohibit the implementation of quotas but that Act
   would not be applicable to a scheme addressing the integration of
   University residences. A reference to quotas is therefore at best
   uninformed and at worst dishonest.

   In the case of Minister of Finance v Van Heerden the Constitutional
   Court provided guidance about how to evaluate the lawfulness of redress
   measures. In that case the court affirmed that courts “must be
   reluctant to interfere with [remedial] measures, and [must] exercise
   due restraint when tempted to interpose themselves as arbiters as to
   whether the measure could have been proceeded with in a better or less
   onerous way”. The Court also affirmed that remedial measures will
   necessarily sometimes negatively affect excluded groups (like white
   South Africans) who are currently enjoying the benefits of past unfair
   discrimination and that this would not be decisive when considering
   whether the measures are legally valid or not.

   Of course, it is not only those whites who grew up during the Apartheid
   years that continue to benefit from Apartheid vis-à-vis black South
   Africans. Almost all if not all of the children and grandchildren of
   Apartheid beneficiaries are still benefiting from Apartheid because
   they enjoy a certain standard of education, a social status and other
   benefits derived from the unearned economic privileges of their parents
   and grandparents and because of their white skins that still largely
   shield them from the daily racism experienced by many black South
   Africans. After all, there are few white teenagers who dress up in
   their best clothes when they go to the Waterfront or Sandton City to
   protect themselves from the racial prejudices of shop assistants or
   security personnel who might otherwise assume that they are shoplifters
   or vagabonds.

   It is also wrong to assume that a white person who did not flourish
   during Apartheid did not benefit from the system. As the system
   shielded all white people from having to compete against the majority
   of South Africans for educational opportunities, jobs and other social
   benefits, even white South Africans who did not become rich during
   Apartheid still benefited from the system because they never had to
   compete fairly with the 40 million other South Africans for educational
   and employment opportunities.

   Nevertheless, it must be conceded that not all redress measures will be
   legally valid. In the Van Heerden case Moseneke stated that “a measure
   should not constitute an abuse of power or impose such substantial and
   undue harm on those excluded from its benefits that our long-term
   constitutional goal would be threatened.” In a concurring judgment
   Sachs explained this approach as follows:

   “[I]f the measure at issue is manifestly overbalanced in ignoring or
   trampling on the interests of members of the advantaged section of the
   community, and gratuitously and flagrantly imposes disproportionate
   burdens on them, the courts have a duty to interfere. Given our
   historical circumstances and the massive inequalities that plague our
   society, the balance when determining whether a measure promotes
   equality is fair will be heavily weighted in favour of opening up
   opportunities for the disadvantaged… Yet some degree of
   proportionality, based on the particular context and circumstances of
   each case, can never be ruled out.”

   The requirement that there should be a degree of proportionality
   between the measures and the effect of the measures on the excluded
   group must not be confused with a requirement of a blanket ban on
   redress measures. Only in extreme cases will redress measures be found
   to be unlawful. For example, a quota system will place an undue burden
   on white Afrikaners and will impose flagrantly disproportionate burdens
   on them if it completely ignores the so-called “merit” (as we know,
   “merit” is a deeply contested term in a diverse society) of the white
   applicants or if it made it impossible for any of them to access the
   benefit that forms the target of the corrective measures. So, if the
   University of Stellenbosch had implemented a redress policy that
   disbarred any white Afrikaans students from admission to a University
   residence, its policy would constitute unfair discrimination. But this
   is not what the University is proposing here.

   The Constitution does not allow those who continue to benefit from past
   unfair racial discrimination to insist on the retention of the status
   quo. Neither does it protect white Afrikaners from having to integrate
   socially with a critical mass of people from other races and language
   groups while dishonestly pretending that they are merely upholding the
   values of non-racialism. You might not like this incontrovertible fact.
   But you cannot pretend that the Constitution or the law is on your
   side. It is not. Those who hold otherwise are not being honest.

   Written by: Pierre de Vos

   This article was published on Daily Maverick.
   Prev Next

   PO Box 94
   Makhanda (Grahamstown) 6140
   Eastern Cape, South Africa

   +27 46 603 8111
   Communications@ru.ac.za

Our Campus

     * Student Affairs
     * Infrastructure, Operations & Finance
     * Campus Safety
     * Office of the Vice Chancellor
     * Facility Services
     * Human Resources

Student Services

     * ROSS
     * Library
     * Halls & Residences
     * Postgrad Gateway
     * Information Technologies
     * Student Life

Academics

     * Research
     * Faculties and Departments
     * Library
     * Timetable
     * Apply For Admissions
     * Vacancies

   Copyright All Right Reserved 2019, Max Themes
   ©  Rhodes University, PAIA Documents,  Privacy and Terms
