   #alternate South Africa: Rich Land, Poor People

   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON) Sections
   (BUTTON) SEARCH
   Skip to contentSkip to site index

   Today’s Paper

   South Africa: Rich Land, Poor People
   https://www.nytimes.com/1979/10/19/archives/south-africa-rich-land-poor
   -people-sports-of-the-times.html
     * (BUTTON) Give this articleGive this articleGive this article
     * (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON)

   Advertisement
   Continue reading the main story

   Supported by
   Continue reading the main story

South Africa: Rich Land, Poor People

     * Send any friend a story
       As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month.
       Anyone can read what you share.
       (BUTTON)
       (BUTTON) Give this articleGive this articleGive this article
     * (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON)

   Red Smith
     * Oct. 19, 1979

   Credit...The New York Times Archives
   See the article in its original context from
   October 19, 1979, Section A, Page 26Buy Reprints
   View on timesmachine
   TimesMachine is an exclusive benefit for home delivery and digital
   subscribers.
   About the Archive
   This is a digitized version of an article from The Times’s print
   archive, before the start of online publication in 1996. To preserve
   these articles as they originally appeared, The Times does not alter,
   edit or update them.
   Occasionally the digitization process introduces transcription errors
   or other problems; we are continuing to work to improve these archived
   versions.

   JOHANNESBURG, Oct. 18 ‐ The Cherokee Six took off from the Grand
   Central airfield, which small planes use, and flew northwest over flat
   farmlands. It is an arid plain with plowed fields stretching away from
   little patches of green where trees surround the farm buildings. In
   most of these compounds, a swimming

   Sports of The Times pool could be seen, blue and inviting now that
   spring swings into summer. Near the first ridge of hills. the fresh
   green of grass and trees bordering a river made a long and snaky trail.
   The plane passed over a big industrial plant, South Africa's
   atomicresearch project. Then there was water below, a big reservoir
   created by the Hartebeesport Dam, which closes a cleft in steep
   mountains.

   This was a popular sports area, our host said, providing fishing,
   skiing and hunting for those who could afford it. Beyond the ridge the
   land flattened out again, but this was a checkerboard of green and tan,
   fertile farmland with the darker green of citrus groves in long and
   orderly rows. The cultivated area gave way to desert ‐ red land, gray
   land, only here and there a plowed field. All this was platinum
   country, the host said. He pointed to a shapeless huddle of buildings
   on a treeless barren where the sun glinted on metal roofs. This was a
   black township, he said, whose residents worked in that town off the
   horizon.

   Now it was desert, pocked and parched, without a trace of habitation.
   Where there had been paved highways and superhighways, there were now
   just a few dirt roads like red veins across the landscape. This was the
   tribal homeland of Bophuthatswana. “Homelands,” a black man in
   Johannesburg had said, are dumping places. When a black loses his job,
   when he can't live in a township like Soweto, the Government checks his
   ethnic origins and dumps him on the tribal chief in his “homeland.”

   “There is a typical homeland village,” the host said now, indicating
   cluster of huts crouched on the bare red plain.

   Platinum and Gold

   The scene changed abruptly. The desert ended at the Pilanesberg
   Mountains, named for a Zulu chief. Set in these hills was a valley of
   lush green, where the first sight that met the eye was a golf course
   designed by Gary Player. This was Sun City, the luxury resort and
   gambling casino that the Southern Sun Hotels chain will open in
   December. Not far from completion, the hotel has an octagonal core with
   long wings stretching right and left. Some distance behind it is what
   looks like a modern apartment building, where black help will live.

   Circling the complex twice, the plane turned south across the desert to
   the town of Rustenburg. First there was the black township, the little,
   brick, box‐like houses on unpaved streets, then the neat city with
   trees and lawns and swimming pools, then citrus groves and green farms.

   “If it weren't for the platinum mines where they work,” the host had
   said passing over the township, “these people would have no income at
   all.”

   From there it was southeast to Witwatersrand ‐ White Water Ridge and
   gold‐mining country. It was good land defaced by great white mesas.
   Each of these marks a gold mine. The sand brought up from the mines is
   washed with cyanide and becomes white waste where nothing grows
   readily. Those white mounds on the horizon, the host said, marked the
   deepest gold mine in the world, boring almost two miles into the earth.

   Then it was across the township of Soweto, where more than a million
   blacks live, then over the swimming pools and tennis courts and golf
   courses of suburban Jo‐berg and back to a landing at Grand Central.

   “We have a rich country,” the host said. “Too bad we have such bloody
   political problems.”

   Slums and Swimming Pools

   The flight emphasized the painful contrasts that hammer themselves into
   the visitor's consciousness here. There is wealth and there is poverty
   in any land. There are slums and swimming pools. Here there is also
   hopelessness, because racial discrimination is the law.

   John Tate, an American black, and Gerrie Coetzee, a white South
   African, are fighting in Pretoria on Saturday for World Boxing
   Association recognition as heavyweight champion of the world. In many
   countries this would be an attractive match, maybe an exciting one, be-
   tween two young, unbeaten athletes who act and speak like good guys.
   Here it is more.

   Because blacks who can afford a ticket will be admitted to Loftus
   Versfeld Stadium for the first time, some see the event as a toe in the
   door of racial discrimination. Some see it as a chance for an
   ostracized nation to win one of the big prizes in sports.

   “But let's face it,” a black man said. “This is black against white.
   Not many blacks can buy tickets, but they will go mad for Tate.”

   Not all blacks agree. In the aching squalor of Soweto, two members of
   the secret police walked smiling pleasantly from the office of Dr.
   Nthalo Motlana in the but that is his clinic. Dr. Motlana is head of
   the Committee of Ten, active opponents of the Government policy of
   apartheid, and authorities keep an eye on him. As the cops departed,
   the visiting press walked in.

   Dr. Motlana said he was a boxing fan, but he would not be going to the
   fight. He said John Tate had not endeared himself to South African
   blacks. He said Tate had been too busy to visit Soweto and take part in
   black activities. (Tate did go to Soweto before an earlier fight here,
   but not this time).

   Dr. Motlana is a wispy little man with a wispy beard, but his voice is
   strong. He said he did not think this fight would bring about a change
   in Government policy. There was no change, he said, yet still he would
   hope. He excused himself. He had patients waiting.

   Advertisement
   Continue reading the main story

Site Information Navigation

     * © 2022 The New York Times Company

     * NYTCo
     * Contact Us
     * Accessibility
     * Work with us
     * Advertise
     * T Brand Studio
     * Your Ad Choices
     * Privacy Policy
     * Terms of Service
     * Terms of Sale
     * Site Map
     * Canada
     * International
     * Help
     * Subscriptions

   IFRAME:
   https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-P528B3&gtm_auth=tfAzqo1
   rYDLgYhmTnSjPqw&gtm_preview=env-130&gtm_cookies_win=x
